 
 
1 
 
Combining physical models with dynamically acquired experimental information 
for the optimization of multicomponent NASICON fast ionic conductors in a self-
driving laboratory 
 
Bernardus Rendy1,2,3, Yuxing Fei1,2, Tanjin He4, Xiaochen Yang1,2, Andrea Giunto1,2, 
Lauren N. Walters5,1, David Milsted2, Hao Qiu1, Matthew J. McDermott2, Bin Ouyang2,6, 
Yan Zeng2,7,*, Gerbrand Ceder1,2,3,* 
Abstract 
Elemental substitution within existing structural frameworks is a widely applied strategy for 
developing advanced materials. Yet, optimizing target properties while maintaining phase purity 
usually demands extensive trial-and-error, which becomes substantially inefficient when 
navigating a complex design space. Here, we introduce a strategy that simultaneously and 
dynamically assesses composition-dependent synthetic accessibility and target properties via 
aggregated cost functions that guide autonomous experimentation in a truly self-driving and self-
learning mode. Specifically, we developed a cost-guided autonomous solid-state synthesis (CASS) 
framework and demonstrate its application in the discovery of Na superionic conductor 
(NASICON) solid electrolytes. CASS successfully optimizes ionic conductivity and phase purity, 
leading to the identification of 18 promising compositions in 78 trials conducted in an autonomous 
laboratory, the A-Lab. Among these, we identified two fast-conducting NASICONs yielding total 
(bulk) ionic conductivity of 0.7 (3.96) and 0.3 (3.17) mS/cm. The successful deployment of CASS 
reinforces the potential of coupling self-driving autonomous laboratories with physics-informed 
 
1 Department of Materials Science & Engineering, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 
94720, USA 
2 Materials Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA 
3 Energy Storage Research Alliance, Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 South Cass Avenue, Lemont, IL 
60439, USA 
4 Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 South Cass Avenue, Lemont, IL 60439, USA 
5 Bakar Institute of Digital Materials for the Planet, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA 
6 Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235, 
USA 
7 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235, USA 
* Corresponding authors: gceder@berkeley.edu (G.C.), yan.zeng@vanderbilt.edu (Y.Z.) 
 


 
 
2 
 
generative models to accelerate materials discovery. Moreover, the interpretability of the design 
factors, informed by outcomes from both successful and failed syntheses, enables model 
refinement and generation of new chemical insights. 
 
Keywords: autonomous synthesis; self-driving laboratories; NASICON; sodium solid electrolytes; 
synthesizability; ionic conductivity 
 
1. Introduction 
Elemental substitution constitutes a fundamental strategy in materials science, enabling the 
continuous tuning of functional properties to meet complex performance criteria1. Almost all 
technological materials in engineering have very specific compositions adjusted for target 
properties, even defining very different materials classes within a given solid-solution space. 
Examples can be found in the LiNixMnyCozO2 (NMC) family of Li-ion cathode materials2, Ti3 and 
Al4 alloys, stainless steels5, and others6–11. While novel compound discovery is often the focus of 
academic research, this compositional tuning to satisfy multiple (often opposing) property 
constraints forms the bread and butter of most technological materials innovation. This vast 
compositional flexibility is also essential for discovering the diverse portfolio of candidate 
materials required to address the multi-objective challenges in next-generation energy storage12. 
Specifically, for all-solid-state sodium-ion batteries, a sustainable alternative to lithium-ion battery 
technologies, the development of solid-state electrolytes (SSEs) must simultaneously optimize 
ionic conductivity, stability, and processability13–19. For this purpose, oxide-based phosphosilicate 
Na superionic conductors (NASICONs) with the general formula NawM2(PO4)3-z(SiO4)z offer a 
versatile SSE platform with good stability and wide electrochemical windows20,21. This structure 
allows for systematic property tuning via extensive cation (M) and polyanion (PO4, SiO4) 
substitution, followed by sodium (Na) content adjustment to maintain charge balance21–26. Given 
their structural flexibility to accommodate vast chemical variations, accelerating the discovery of 
optimal NASICONs requires exploiting established compositional design rules. Strategies such as 
aliovalent cation doping to optimize charge-carrier concentration, and anion substitution to tune 
the lattice bottleneck size, are well-established approaches for designing fast-conducting 
NASICON-type materials27–29. However, synthesizing these tailored NASICONs remains 


 
 
3 
 
experimentally challenging due to the formation of impurity or competing phases that can impede 
ionic conductivity29,30. 
To tackle this synthesis challenge, materials discovery campaigns often rely on either static 
computational funnels31 or Bayesian optimization (BO) for systematic screening and decision-
making. Incorporating these methods has become increasingly important, particularly given the 
proven acceleration offered by self-driving and automated laboratories25,32–40. However, static 
funnels cascade candidates through rigid filters25,36 without adapting to mid-campaign 
experimental feedback, thereby limiting the design space. Conversely, while BO has successfully 
tuned NASICON compositions41,42, these campaigns are largely restricted to the close 
compositional vicinity of known materials. Within such constrained single-phase solid-solution 
regimes, elemental substitutions often yield smooth and stationary property landscapes well-suited 
to standard Gaussian process kernels43,44. However, navigating beyond these local regimes to map 
new phase boundaries exposes a highly rugged and non-stationary global property landscape45, 
characterized by vast regions of competing phases punctuated by the abrupt emergence of the 
target phase. We demonstrate in this paper that by utilizing experimental feedback to update prior 
models in an autonomous way, it is possible to rapidly identify target phase domains45–47.  
To practically implement this dynamic prior approach and navigate the non-stationary 
synthesis landscapes, we established the Cost-guided Autonomous Solid-state Synthesis (CASS) 
active learning framework. CASS initializes the design space using model estimates of synthetic 
accessibility and ionic conductivity, which serve as the foundational prior model. To efficiently 
identify the optimal composition within a complex chemical space, the framework couples an 
evolutionary algorithm with a gradient-based optimizer. Rather than relying on static 
computational filters, CASS submits candidate compositions to an autonomous synthesis 
laboratory, the A-Lab32, to acquire mid-campaign experimental feedback. Crucially, the 
framework utilizes experimental characterization results, specifically the synthetically accessible 
compositions inferred from observed lattice parameters and the presence and characterization of 
impurity phases, to actively recalibrate the design space. This closed-loop process iteratively steers 
the system toward synthesizable candidates that adhere to the targeted ionic conductivity design 
rule. We demonstrate that CASS successfully navigated high-dimensional chemical spaces and 
strategically designed and synthesized promising fast conducting NASICONs. This success lays 


 
 
4 
 
the foundation for integrating additional design rules into the framework, enabling the 
simultaneous execution of multiple predictive models alongside probabilistic synthetic 
accessibility assessments. 
2. Results 
2.1. Overview of the CASS framework 
Discovering functional materials in multicomponent chemical spaces requires decision-making 
strategies that can jointly account for target properties and synthetic accessibility. While it is 
possible to rely on models to predict properties, any optimization campaign needs to account for 
the physical reality of laboratory observations which may be inconsistent with prior models. To 
meet this need, we established the CASS framework, which combines prior physical models with 
iterative experimental feedback in a closed-loop design process. We use this framework here to 
identify NASICON solid electrolytes with high ionic conductivity. Figure 1a shows how CASS 
explores a predefined chemical space of NASICON by minimizing an aggregated cost function 
over candidate compositions. Each candidate is represented by its cation composition (excluding 
Na) and polyanion stoichiometry. To navigate the resulting search space efficiently, CASS 
combines global exploration by a genetic algorithm followed by gradient-based refinement for 
precise local optimization (Methods). The selected compositions are then synthesized through 
automated experimentation in the A-Lab32, characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), and the 
resulting phase information is returned to the framework to inform the next design iteration. 
Figure 1b shows how the aggregated cost function evolves over the course of the closed-loop 
search. The first design iteration is guided by static cost functions (Π!"#"$%) derived from prior 
physical knowledge, specifically synthetic accessibility and ionic conductivity. In subsequent 
iterations, dynamic cost functions (Π&'(#)$%) inferred from experimental characterization 
outcomes (phase identification and refined lattice parameters of the NASICON phase) are added 
to update the total cost landscape. This allows CASS to move from prior-guided exploration to 
feedback-informed redesign as the campaign progresses. 


 
 
5 
 
 
Figure 1. CASS framework overview. (a) Closed-loop workflow integrating design, synthesis, 
and XRD characterization. Feedback from phase analysis updates the dynamic components of the 
aggregated cost function for subsequent iterations. (b) Evolution of the cost function. Initial 
designs rely on static priors (Π!"#"$%), while subsequent iterations incorporate characterization-
derived dynamic costs (Π&'(#)$%) into a total cost function (Π*+"#,). Color gradients indicate 
relative cost magnitude. 
 
Dosing and mixing
Heating
Powder Recovery & XRD
XRD reﬁnement and impurity phase search
Optimal composition
Design #
1.0
1
0.4 1.5
Cation
Anion
N
…
0.2 0.6 2.4
Cost
Genetic algorithm (GA)
Optimal GA composition
Gradient-based optimizer
Synthesis and characterization
Update 
cost 
functions
Aggregated cost function (𝜋𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙)
Design using static cost functions
Redesign using static and dynamic cost functions
Second 
synthesis trial
First 
synthesis trial
(a)
(b)
Third to N-th
synthesis trial
…
Π𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙= Π𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑐+ Π𝐷𝑦𝑛𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑐
Updated 
dynamic cost 
function


 
 
6 
 
2.2. 
Static and dynamic cost functions for CASS 
The aggregated cost function comprises three static terms and two dynamic terms. The static cost 
functions encode prior physical knowledge available before any experiment is performed and 
initialize the search toward compositions that are both synthetically accessible and likely to exhibit 
high ionic conductivity. Specifically, we defined static terms, explained in detail below, to 
represent thermodynamic stability, structural stability, and ionic conductivity, respectively. 
Thermodynamic stability (𝜋*-./)+) is configured to rule out compositions that do not form 
single-phase materials, classifying them as synthetically inaccessible. As shown in Figure 2a, 
𝜋*-./)+ employs a linear support vector classifier (SVC) to distinguish synthetically accessible 
(A) from inaccessible (I) compositions. We utilized previously published stability descriptors 
capable of separating stable and unstable NASICONs48 to build the feature space. To enable rapid 
design, we excluded the Ewald energy (𝐸01#,2) from this feature space, as its calculation can 
require the combinatorially expensive generation and energy evaluation of large, ordered 
supercells for certain compositions48–50. Because the exact thermodynamic limit for synthetic 
accessibility is unknown, and the prior knowledge is dynamically modified with observations in 
the synthesis campaign, we modified the synthesizability model from reference 48 to make it more 
inclusive, ensuring that all experimentally observed compositions are classified as synthetically 
accessible. This was done by retraining the linear SVC with the original methodology and the 
3,881 computed NASICON compositions of reference 48. The energy above hull (𝐸-3,,) limit was 
increased to a value, 𝐸"-/.4-+,2, at which all 524 experimentally verified, literature-mined 
NASICON compositions were correctly classified as synthetically accessible (Supplementary 
Figure 1b). This value of 𝐸"-/.4-+,2 was 62.22 meV/atom, which we adopted as the synthetic 
accessibility threshold for this study. We ensured that this reduced descriptor set and final updated 
classifier retained comparable accuracy, recall, and F1-scores (see Methods). Consequently, the 
final decision boundary (Figure 2a) relies on four remaining descriptors from the prior study48: 
the electronegativity difference between Na and the cations (𝑋5
6#), cation radius deviation (𝑅5
!*&), 
sodium content (𝑁6#), and anion charge deviation (𝑄7
!*&). Based on this boundary, the 𝜋*-./)+ 
cost is set to zero for synthetically accessible compositions and scales proportionally with the Platt-
scaled instability probability48,51 for synthetically inaccessible regions. 
As low energy above hull is only a required condition but not a sufficient condition for 
synthesizability52, we add more information through a structural stability (𝜋&$4"+/"$+() cost 


 
 
7 
 
function (Figure 2b) which enforces a ceiling on the local lattice distortion53–55 quantified by the 
root-mean-square (RMS) variation of the cation sizes, 𝑅5
!*&, that tightens with increasing 
compositional complexity. This limit is crucial, as excessive distortion of the cation polyhedra 
imposes a severe enthalpic penalty that overcomes the system's entropic stabilization, destabilizing 
the NASICON framework and driving the formation of competing phases. Derived from the 524 
experimentally verified compositions mined from the literature, this empirical boundary assigns 
zero cost to synthetically accessible (A) compositions and a linear penalty to those exceeding the 
threshold (synthetically inaccessible (I)). 
The model for ionic conductivity (𝜋89) (Figure 2c) defines a likely high ionic conductivity 
domain25 (LHIC) surrogate model based on average metal cation radius (𝑅)5), sodium content 
(𝑁6#), and average polyanion center ion radius (𝑅)7), adapting data from 484 published NASICON 
composition-conductivity pairs25. Compositions within this domain incur zero cost, while outliers 
face a linear penalty proportional to their distance from the boundary. 
To incorporate the feedback from experiments in this campaign, we additionally define two 
dynamic cost functions, one related to impurity phases, and the other related to the lattice 
parameters of the obtained NASICON phase, based on the outcome of prior synthesis trials. 
Impurity minimization (𝜋8):3/$"') constrains the design space by penalizing new candidate 
compositions if their concentration of ions (except Na) that are found in impurity phases exceeds 
that of the previous impurity-forming target composition (Figure 2d). For example, in the Na-Zr-
La-Ti-Si-P-O NASICON system, detection of a Na3La(PO4)2 impurity phase penalizes candidates 
with higher La or P contents than in the prior composition that generated the Na3La(PO4)2 impurity. 
Such feedback allows the system to correct for any deficiencies in its prior model. 
When a NASICON phase forms during a synthesis attempt, identifying its composition 
expands the known library of synthesizable NASICONs. To approximate this NASICON 
composition in a sample that is not phase-pure, we extract its lattice parameters by automated XRD 
refinement and map them to candidate solid-solution compositions using Vegard’s approximation. 
In the subsequent iterations, the lattice-parameter cost function (𝜋;<) steers subsequent candidates 
toward compositions consistent with the experimentally realized NASICON phase (Figure 2e). 
𝜋;< applies a linear penalty to deviations between the experimentally observed lattice parameters 
and those predicted by a fine-tuned model for the corresponding chemical space (Methods). 


 
 
8 
 
Consequently, the cost minima explicitly pinpoint candidate compositions whose predicted lattice 
parameters match the experimental NASICON phase. 
These static and dynamic terms are combined into a single aggregated cost function that guides 
the global search toward synthetically accessible compositions with high ionic conductivity while 
incorporating feedback from prior synthesis trials. The total cost is constructed as a weighted sum 
of 𝑤=𝜋*-./)+ + 𝑤>𝜋&$4"+/"$+( + 𝑤?𝜋89 + 𝑤@𝜋8):3/$"' + 𝑤A𝜋;<, with weights (𝑤$) assigned 
empirically to ensure comparable magnitudes across the five terms (Methods). 
 
 
Figure 2. Static and dynamic cost functions for CASS. (a-b) Underlying model (top) and cost 
function (bottom) of the static synthetic accessibility costs. (a) Thermodynamic stability (𝜋*-./)+) 
(e)
524 text-mined compositions
3881 Eℎ𝑢𝑙𝑙,𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑎𝑙
(b) Cation site distortion limit
(a) Thermodynamic stability
𝜋𝑇ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑚𝑜
𝜋𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
I
A
I
A
I
A
I
A
(c) Optimal lattice for ionic conductivity
LHIC
𝜋𝐼𝐶
484 text-mined ionic conductivity & composition pairs
Synthesized 
NASICON
Na3La(PO4)2
Impurity
Prior synthesis trial
(d)
𝜋𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦
𝜋𝐿𝑃
Previous target 
composition


 
 
9 
 
utilizes a four-descriptor classifier to penalize compositions in synthetically inaccessible (I) 
regions based on their probability of instability, while applying no penalty to those within the 
accessible (A) region based on reference 48. (b) Structural stability (𝜋&$4"+/"$+() applies a linear 
penalty to candidates exceeding an empirical lattice distortion (𝑅5
!*&) ceiling that tightens with 
compositional complexity. (c) Static ionic conductivity cost function (𝜋89) penalizes deviations 
from a likely high-ionic conductivity (LHIC, inside) domain defined by 𝑅)5, 𝑁6#, and 𝑅)7. (d, e) 
Dynamic costs derived from synthesis feedback. (d) Detection of an impurity phase (e.g., 
Na3La(PO4)2) and NASICON primary phase in a prior trial parameterizes 𝜋8):3/$"' and 𝜋;< 
dynamic cost functions. Impurity minimization (𝜋8):3/$"') penalizes candidates with impurity-
forming ion concentrations exceeding the prior target (yellow triangle). (e) Lattice parameter 
feedback (𝜋;<) minimizes the deviation between theoretical (Vegard’s approximation) and 
observed lattice parameters to match the next design with the synthesized stoichiometry. Color 
gradients indicate cost magnitude. 
 
2.3. 
CASS synthetic accessibility optimization 
We first evaluated the capability of the CASS framework in optimizing synthetic accessibility 
using synthesis-related cost functions (static cost functions 𝜋*-./)+, 𝜋&$4"+/"$+(, and dynamic cost 
functions 𝜋8):3/$"', 𝜋;<). We initialized the synthesis with compositions containing equimolar 
cations in the Hf-Zr-Ge pseudoternary (Figure 3a-b) and Hf-Zr-Ti-Ge pseudoquaternary (Figure 
3c-d) phosphate (PO4) systems, intentionally selected for their plausibility to exceed solubility 
limits considering the large size difference between cations such as Zr4+ and Ge4+. In this 
accessibility demonstration the initial equimolar compositions were chosen deliberately rather than 
by minimizing the static cost functions. In each column of Figure 3, the top subfigure (a, c) shows 
the XRD pattern of the first synthesis attempt while the bottom subfigure (b, d) shows the result 
after a single iteration in which the composition was adjusted following the guidance of the cost 
functions. For these two systems, the CASS algorithm was able to reduce the impurity peaks 
substantially in a single iteration. 
For example, in the Hf-Zr-Ge system, the composition NaHf0.67Zr0.67Ge0.67(PO4)3 was 
initially attempted. The XRD pattern of the obtained material (Figure 3a) indicates a NASICON 
phase purity of approximately 53 wt%, accompanied by impurity phases containing NaGe2(PO4)3 


 
 
10 
 
and ZrP2O7. In the next iteration, the dynamic cost function 𝜋8):3/$"' guided the design of new 
compositions to contain lower concentrations of the identified impurity-forming cations, in this 
case, Ge and Zr. Simultaneously, the 𝜋;< cost function required the new composition to possess 
lattice parameters similar to the NASICON phase observed in the first trial, a constraint that prefers 
higher Zr and Hf contents. Balancing these competing objectives, CASS proposed 
NaHf1.0Zr0.89Ge0.11(PO4)3 for the second trial. The XRD pattern of this updated composition 
(Figure 3b) demonstrates a successfully synthesized, single-phase NASICON product. Similarly, 
in a higher-dimensional Hf-Zr-Ti-Ge system, starting with equimolar cations yielded about 90 
wt% NASICON, accompanied by TiO2 and GeO2 impurities (Figure 3c). After just one iteration 
of 
CASS 
guidance, 
a 
single-phase 
NASICON 
with 
the 
composition 
NaHf0.76Zr0.89Ti0.23Ge0.12(PO4)3 (Figure 3d) was successfully synthesized. Here, the Ti and Ge 
contents were specifically reduced due to the 𝜋8):3/$"' constraints.  
Additional examples of phase purity enhancement across one to three iterations are 
provided in the Supplementary Information for various NASICON systems. These include PO4-
based NASICONs (Zr-Sn-Ti-Ge, Zr-Ti-Ge, Zr-Sn-Ge, and Zr-Nb-Ge) and an SiO4-based 
NASICON (Zr-Sn-Ti-Ge) (Supplementary Figures 2-6). Notably, these improvements occurred 
even when the automated refinement occasionally failed to identify specific minor impurity 
phases. These results demonstrate that redesigning compositions based on both synthetic 
accessibility models and characterized synthesis outcomes effectively optimizes target phase 
purity. Note that even when the impurity detection cannot provide quantitative information, the 
effort to find compositions that reproduce the lattice parameter of the observed NASICON may 
drive the synthesis towards single phases, though with a more ambiguous signal.  


 
 
11 
 
 
Figure 3. Validation of synthetic accessibility cost functions. Comparative Rietveld refinements 
of initial (top) versus CASS-optimized (bottom) synthesis trials for the (a, b) Hf-Zr-Ge and (c, d) 
Hf-Zr-Ti-Ge systems of PO4 polyanion-NASICON after a single iteration. The CASS-optimized 
trials exhibit substantially decreased impurity peak intensities relative to the primary NASICON 
phase. 
 
2.4. 
CASS iterative design for fast NASICON ionic conductors 
After confirming that CASS is capable of performing synthetic accessibility optimization, we 
further demonstrate joint optimization of single-phase synthesis with ionic conductivity as an 
additional target. To demonstrate optimization against these multiple (sometimes conflicting) 
requirements, we deployed the CASS framework using all cost functions (static cost functions 
𝜋*-./)+, 𝜋&$4"+/"$+(, 𝜋89 and dynamic cost functions 𝜋8):3/$"', 𝜋;<) to explore the high-
dimensional NASICON space NawM2(PO4)3-z(SiO4)z for single phases with high ionic 
conductivity. M contains a mix of at least three types of cations chosen from the following: Mg2+, 
Zn2+, Al3+, Sc3+, Y3+, In3+, Ga3+, La3+, Ti4+, Zr4+, Hf4+, Ge4+, Sn4+, Nb5+, and Ta5+. The Na content 
(c) NaHf0.50Zr0.50Ti0.50Ge0.50(PO4)3
NaHf0.76Zr0.89Ti0.23Ge0.12(PO4)3
Single iteration
𝑅𝑤𝑝= 5.93%
𝑅𝑤𝑝= 6.91%
NaHf0.67Zr0.67Ge0.67(PO4)3
(a)
NaHf1.00Zr0.89Ge0.11(PO4)3
Single iteration
𝑅𝑤𝑝= 8.00%
𝑅𝑤𝑝= 7.75%
(b)
(d)


 
 
12 
 
is determined by charge neutrality. Success of a trial was assessed using a Purity Score, a 
quantifiable metric derived from XRD peak intensities that assesses the relative content of a 
NASICON phase against impurity phases. Benchmarking of the purity score is discussed in 
Methods. On this calibrated scale, a score > 0.7 indicates NASICON as the major phase with 
minor impurities, while 1.0 refers to a single-phase NASICON with negligible impurities. To 
ensure that the NASICON phase likely has a composition close to the targeted composition, a 
check on the lattice parameters of the phase was done. We classified target compositions as failures 
(Purity Score = 0.0) if the deviation between the experimentally measured lattice parameters and 
those predicted by Vegard’s approximation exceeded the model’s inherent uncertainty, plus an 
additional tolerance of 15% of the chemical space range (defined by the predicted lattice 
parameters of the NASICON end members). This extra tolerance of deviation accounts for 
potential slight off-stoichiometry in the synthesized products and was calibrated against 
pseudobinary phosphate NASICONs with independently synthesized end members (Methods, 
Supplementary Information 1). For a subset of samples that contain NASICON as the major 
phase (Purity Score > 0.7), Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was employed to 
measure their ionic conductivities.  
To test whether the CASS framework could leverage immediate experimental feedback to 
design higher-purity and high-ionic-conductivity compositions, up to two synthesis trials (an initial 
design and a single optimization) were executed across 54 NASICON compositional spaces. To 
start, 62 compositions were generated, constrained to having the (SiO4)2(PO4) anion composition, 
using the static cost functions and subject to automated synthesis in the A-Lab. The results are 
summarized in Figure 4. In the first trial, 24 of 62 compositions (39%) produced an observable 
NASICON phase, with 12 forming NASICON as the major phase (Purity Score > 0.7). In the 
second trial, which incorporated updated dynamic cost functions, 16 compositions from those 
containing an observable NASICON phase were subject to further optimization. These 
compositions were chosen for practical reasons (excluding Sc to minimize experimental cost) and 
in multiples of 8 to maximize experimental efficiency (as each box furnace in the A-Lab has a 
capacity of heating 8 samples per batch). Of these, 11 compounds maintained or enhanced their 
phase purity, 3 showed poorer purity, and 2 failed to form a NASICON phase close to the target 
composition. Cumulatively, after two iterations, 23 of the 78 total attempted compositions yielded 
NASICON as the major phase. These 23 compositions were evaluated against the targeted domain 


 
 
13 
 
for ionic conductivity (Figure 2c, quantified by 𝜋89 ≤0.025, where 𝜋89 > 0 indicates a 
composition falls outside the strict target boundary, with the penalty value scaling by distance from 
that boundary). Eighteen (78%) fell within or near this domain. Ultimately, these 78 trials produced 
a robust set of major-phase NASICON candidates that can serve as excellent starting points for 
subsequent Bayesian optimization41,42. 
The formation of the NASICON phase in the first trial and the subsequent phase-purity 
improvement in the second trial highlight CASS's dual capability: generating initial designs from 
static priors and refining them by dynamically integrating experimental feedback. For example, 
the initial static design for the Sn-Zr-In-Ti system, Na3.5Zr0.6Ti0.2In0.5Sn0.7(SiO4)2(PO4), yielded a 
modest 
Purity 
Score 
of 
~0.53. 
By 
dynamically 
adjusting 
the 
target 
to 
Na3.6Zr0.9Ti0.1In0.8Sn0.2(SiO4)1.8(PO4)1.2 based on the identified phases and NASICON lattice 
parameters feedback, the second iteration successfully suppressed competing impurities, forming 
NASICON as the major phase with a Purity Score of ~0.81. However, occasional regressions in 
phase-purity, such as the three compositions that decreased in purity and the two that failed to form 
the target phase, highlight the limitations of the current method. These optimization failures likely 
originate from the inability of 𝜋;< to uniquely determine the composition of the NASICON when 
it is first found in a multi-phase sample given the wide range of solutions allowed by Vegard’s 
approximation in these high-dimensional composition spaces. Furthermore, the drift of 
composition designs from within to outside the target domain for ionic conductivity (𝜋89) during 
optimization, even as purity increased, reveals a key tradeoff. Returning to the Sn-Zr-In-Ti system, 
although iterative optimization successfully elevated the Purity Score to ~0.81, the algorithm 
achieved this increased purity by pushing the target composition severely outside the optimal ionic 
conductivity domain (drifting from 𝜋89 = 0 to 𝜋89 ≈0.14). This demonstrates that while new 
synthesizable compositions exist within the chemical spaces, their resulting structures and Na 
content may not yield high ionic conductivity, highlighting the competition between property 
optimization and synthesizability. 
Overall, CASS successfully designed and synthesized 18 major-phase NASICON 
compositions within or near the 𝜋89 target domain (𝜋89 ≤0.025), confirming its ability to balance 
synthetic accessibility with ionic conductivity screening. A complete record of all 78 synthesis 
trials is provided in the Supplementary Data. To illustrate the broad chemical space and complex 


 
 
14 
 
stoichiometries accessible by the framework, Table 1 highlights a subset of successful multi-cation 
designs that were not selected for the full evaluation detailed below. 
 
Figure 4. Assessment of iterative design optimization in multicomponent phosphosilicate 
NASICONs. Comparison of Purity Scores between initial (blue) and CASS-redesigned (orange) 
synthesis trials for 16 selected samples. Green and red arrows denote improved/maintained or 
declined purity, respectively. Dashed lines define thresholds for negligible impurities (1.0) and 
major NASICON product phase formation (> 0.7). Donut chart inset: Cumulative campaign 
success, showing 23 of 78 trials yielded a major NASICON phase. 
 
Table 1. Nominal compositions of samples containing NASICON as the major phase, with 
nominal compositions near or within the target ionic-conductivity domain, as quantified by 𝝅𝑰𝑪≤
𝟎. 𝟎𝟐𝟓 
Nominal global composition 
Purity score 
𝝅𝑰𝑪 
Na3.5Hf0.58Zr1.28In0.08Ga0.06(SiO4)2.36(PO4)0.64 
0.93 
0 
Na3.5Hf1.3In0.5Ge0.2(SiO4)2(PO4) 
0.83 
0 
Major
Minor/None


 
 
15 
 
Nominal global composition 
Purity score 
𝝅𝑰𝑪 
Na3.4Hf0.4Zr1.4Zn0.2(SiO4)2(PO4) 
0.82 
0 
Na3.5Y0.2Zr1.5Ga0.3(SiO4)2(PO4) 
0.81 
0 
Na3.4Hf0.4Zr0.3Sc0.3Ta0.2Ti0.1Nb0.2In0.5(SiO4)2(PO4) 
0.77 
0 
Na2.5La0.2Hf1.1Nb0.7(SiO4)2(PO4) 
0.77 
0 
Na3.49Hf0.15Mg0.45Zr1.4(SiO4)1.59(PO4)1.41 
0.76 
0 
Na2.9Y0.2Hf0.4Zr0.3Nb0.4In0.6Sn0.1(SiO4)1.5(PO4)1.5 
0.74 
0.0014 
Na3.11Y0.06Hf0.4Zr0.42Nb0.35In0.4Sn0.37(SiO4)2(PO4) 
0.73 
0 
Na3.5Hf0.41Mg0.09Zr0.26Sc0.25Ta0.26Ti0.06Nb0.17In0.5(SiO4)2(PO4) 
0.72 
0 
Na3.5La0.2Zr1.3Ti0.5(SiO4)2.3(PO4)0.7 
0.71 
0.00053 
 
To evaluate the efficacy of the target ionic conductivity domain, we measured the ionic 
conductivity of six NASICON samples newly synthesized in this study (Figure 5a). These samples 
contain NASICON as the primary phase, and they featured nominal target compositions 
representing various distances from the target domain (i.e., different 𝜋89 values). The 
stoichiometry of the primary NASICON phase of each sample was assessed by combining Rietveld 
refinement of XRD (Supplementary Figures 7-9), 𝜋*-./)+ analysis, lattice parameters 
verification, and compositions measured via scanning electron microscopy and energy-dispersive 
X-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) (Methods). Deviations between the assessed composition of the 
primary NASICON phase and the nominal composition were observed, which we attributed to the 
presence of small amounts of secondary phases. Elemental homogeneity of the NASICON phase 
was verified, though it was slightly less homogeneous than common mineral standards 
(Supplementary Information 2). Before ionic-conductivity measurements, the as-synthesized 
powders were cold-pressed and sintered near their synthesis temperatures to over 85% of 
theoretical density (Methods, Supplementary Information 3, Supplementary Data). Note that 
this post synthetic process may decrease the presence of minor impurities (Supplementary Figure 
10). 


 
 
16 
 
 
Figure 5. Total ionic conductivity as a function of 𝝅𝑰𝑪 and electrochemical characterization 
of the promising NASICON ionic conductors. (a) Various nominal target compositions 
containing NASICON as the major phase are plotted according to their calculated 𝜋89 and 
measured total ionic conductivities. A lower cost function value indicates a closer proximity to the 
target domain for ionic conductivity, while a value of zero denotes that the target composition falls 
inside the target domain. (b-c) Nyquist plots for two of the promising NASICON ionic conductors 
(purple and blue data points) measured at (b) 25 °C and (c) -30 °C. Characteristic frequencies and 
the equivalent circuit model (inset, b) are shown; solid lines represent fits to the experimental data 
(circles). 
4 MHz
100 kHz
R0
R1
R2
CPE2
CPE1
CPE3
1 MHz
6 kHz
(b)
(c)
(a)


 
 
17 
 
Of the six samples, three compositions were positioned near or within the target domain for 
ionic conductivity (𝜋89 ≤0.025), while the other three were located farther outside the domain 
(𝜋89 > 0.025). 
Among 
the 
compositions 
near 
or 
within 
the 
target 
domain, 
Na3.4Hf0.8Zr0.8In0.3Ga0.1(SiO4)2(PO4) and Na3.5Hf1.5In0.4Ga0.1(SiO4)2(PO4) exhibited room-
temperature total ionic conductivities of 0.7 and 0.3 mS/cm, with activation energies of 0.34 and 
0.33 eV, respectively (Supplementary Figure 11a-b). Their corresponding bulk ionic 
conductivities reached 3.96 and 3.17 mS/cm consistent with their low activation energies. Low-
temperature EIS resolved the bulk and grain boundary contributions by shifting the relaxation 
frequency into a more measurable range, from ~4 MHz (at room temperature, Figure 5b) down to 
~1 MHz (at -30 °C, Figure 5c), visibly revealing the bulk semicircle. The bulk ionic conductivities 
of these compositions are comparable to state-of-the-art Na NASICON56 (~5 mS/cm for optimized 
Na3.4Zr2(SiO4)2.4(PO4)0.6) and other polycrystalline oxide Na solid-state conductors (0.23 to 2.9 
mS/cm57–60). This is particularly promising given that post-synthetic processing (e.g., 
densification, sintering conditions, and binder selection) has not been optimized in the current 
study. However, the third sample, Na3.5Hf0.7In1.2Ge0.1(SiO4)1.3(PO4)1.7, is also very near the high 
conductivity domain and yielded only 0.01 mS/cm total ionic conductivity. Conversely, samples 
located 
farther 
outside 
the 
domain, 
Na4.3Hf0.3Zr1.3Zn0.4(SiO4)2.5(PO4)0.5, 
Na3.5Hf0.9In1.0Ga0.1(SiO4)1.4(PO4)1.6, and Na2.8Y0.7Hf0.9Ti0.4(SiO4)1.1(PO4)1.9, exhibited low ionic 
conductivities of 0.01 to 0.06 mS/cm, and the latter two showed correspondingly higher activation 
energies of 0.40 and 0.42 eV, respectively (Supplementary Figure 11c-d). These results support 
the conclusion that minimizing the ionic conductivity cost function (𝜋89), that is, designing the 
nominal global composition to fall close to or within the target domain, generally leads to higher 
total ionic conductivity, despite the occasional false positives. 
 
2.5. 
Assessment of synthetic accessibility estimators 
To assess whether the synthetic accessibility estimators deployed in CASS reflect experimental 
synthesizability, we evaluated them against a dataset comprising results from the synthesis of 281 
unique nominal compositions of mixed-anion phosphosilicate NASICONs (NawM2(PO4)3-
z(SiO4)z, 0 < z < 3) (Supplementary Data). This dataset includes both the synthesis trials 
mentioned in previous sections and additional data generated during preliminary testing of each 
CASS cost function in its design phase. Figure 6a-b show how these compositions are distributed 


 
 
18 
 
across the parameter spaces of our cost functions 𝜋*-./)+ and 𝜋&$4"+/"$+(. These compositions 
populate both the positive and the negative data domain, representing compositions that are 
penalized or prohibited by the cost functions (e.g., 𝜋*-./)+ > 0, 𝜋&$4"+/"$+( > 0).  The domains 
shaded in lighter colors in Figure 6a-b indicate higher cost and hence less likely synthetic 
accessibility. Because the 𝜋*-./)+ and 𝜋&$4"+/"$+( feature spaces were chosen to capture ranking 
of energetic and structural distortion as evaluation metrics for synthesizability, the efficacy of both 
can be evaluated against the success rate of forming a primary NASICON phase across different 
regions of the feature space. This region-wise evaluation follows the established practice of 
binning a continuous predictor and comparing empirical success rates across bins to gauge its 
predictive power61. We bin each feature space by the stability factor it is meant to rank. For 
𝜋*-./)+, regions are defined by the lowest value of Ehull threshold in the SVC (See 5.12) at which 
the phase is predicted as stable (𝐸D$/4" 4"#F,. "-/.4-+,2, details in Methods). Hence, compositions 
with a high value of this 𝐸D$/4" 4"#F,. "-/.4-+,2 are less likely to be stable.  The fact that this is a 
good predictor is confirmed by the data in Figure 6c, which shows the percentage of compositions 
in each bin that led to samples with a major phase NASICON.  The data further reveals that 
thermodynamically stable compositions (𝐸D$/4" 4"#F,. "-/.4-+,2 = 0 meV/atom above the hull, or 
“on the hull”) achieved a 90% success rate of forming a major NASICON phase indicating the 
success of our synthesis campaign in actually synthesizing these compounds. Compositions with 
intermediate stability (𝐸D$/4" 4"#F,. "-/.4-+,2 > 0 to 41 meV/atom) were successful in 37-40% of 
trials. The success rate dropped to 21% beyond 41 meV/atom, interpreted here somewhat 
arbitrarily as a practical synthesis limit, and to 0% when exceeding the 𝜋*-./)+ synthetic 
accessibility threshold (62.22 meV/atom) that we inclusively approximated by encompassing 524 
experimentally verified compositions (as described in section 2.2). Changing the evaluation 
temperature T to 1373 K does not alter this trend or the practical metastability limit 
(Supplementary Figure 12a). 
For 𝜋&$4"+/"$+(, we binned the cation size mismatch relative to the maximum mismatch (𝑅5
!*& −
𝑅5,)#H
!*&
). These binned regions form the horizontal axis of Figure 6d. The data in Figure 6d shows 
that the distortion cost function 𝜋&$4"+/"$+( is also a reasonable measure of synthesizability, though 
its outcome is more binary than the Ehull value.  For 𝜋&$4"+/"$+(, success rates declined slightly as 
values approached the maximum mismatch limit, before dropping to just 6% for samples 
exceeding this ceiling (Figure 6d). Ultimately, these results confirm that establishing an inclusive 


 
 
19 
 
synthetic accessibility threshold based on experimentally verified compositions within an 
optimized stability feature space creates a successful estimator. Further sampling within this 
feature space can narrow down the practical limits, specifically adjusting for the exact synthesis 
methods employed in a given study. 
 
Figure 6. Validation of static synthetic accessibility priors via large-scale sampling. (a-b) 
Distribution of 281 synthesis trials (black dots) across (a) thermodynamic (𝜋*-./)+) and (b) 
structural stability (𝜋&$4"+/"$+() cost landscapes, where lighter colors indicate higher cost. 
Synthetically accessible (A) and inaccessible (I) regions are sampled with various compositions. 
(c) Success rate of forming major-phase NASICON versus the minimum threshold required for a 
composition to be considered stable (𝐸D$/4" 4"#F,. "-/.4-+,2). The dashed vertical line marks the 
practical metastability limit, and numbers above the bars indicate the sample count within each 
bin. (d) Success rate versus the deviation from the maximum allowable cation size mismatch 
(𝑅5
!*& −𝑅5,)#H
!*&
(𝑛)). Error bars denote the standard error calculated via bootstrap/Monte Carlo 
methods. 
(b)
(a)
(d)
(c)
I
A
I
A
Sampled 𝜋𝑇ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑚𝑜
Sampled 𝜋𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
𝜋𝑇ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑚𝑜success rate
𝜋𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛success rate
Samples 
count


 
 
20 
 
 
To more accurately understand the thermodynamic synthetic accessibility factors behind 
NASICON synthesis, we investigated the single-cation and equimolar two-cation NASICON 
subspaces in phosphates, as well as single-cation silicate NASICONs. The relatively simple 
formulas of these subspaces allow for the straightforward identification of the lowest-energy 
ordering in the NASICON phase, enabling a more accurate approximation of 𝐸-3,,,$2.#, (T = 1000 
K was chosen to maintain magnitude comparability with the prior study48; calculation details are 
provided in Supplementary Information 4). We attempted to synthesize various compositions 
by varying the cation pairs (Supplementary Data). Figure 7 correlates these synthesis outcomes 
with 𝐸-3,,,$2.#,, demonstrating that variations in the metal cations strongly correlate with synthesis 
success. Successful phosphate syntheses were confined to compositions at or below approximately 
15 meV/atom above the hull. However, some compositions below this value, including 
NaSnHf(PO₄)₃ and Na₃Al₂(PO₄)₃, did not form the targeted NASICON phase. Na3Al2(PO4)3 
formed an amorphous phase, which is consistent with prior studies conducted at ambient 
pressure62. For single-cation silicate NASICONs, successful syntheses were similarly restricted to 
𝐸-3,,,$2.#, < 15 meV/atom. If the ideal configurational entropy is evaluated at the synthesis 
temperature of T = 1373 K rather than at 1000K, this 15 meV/atom empirical metastability limit 
further decreases to 9.5 meV/atom (Supplementary Figure 12b). Note that, particularly for 
silicates, our current sparse sampling prohibits establishing a definitive ceiling without more 
extensive testing. The corresponding comparison of these phosphate and silicate trials with the 
phosphosilicates in the machine-learned stability feature space is provided in Supplementary 
Information 5. 


 
 
21 
 
 
Figure 7. Empirical metastability limit for phosphate and silicate NASICONs. Density 
functional theory (DFT)-calculated energy above the hull augmented with ideal configurational 
entropy evaluated at 1000 K (𝐸-3,,,$2.#,) for various phosphate (circles) and silicate (triangles) 
NASICON compositions. Blue and cyan markers denote successful synthesis, whereas red markers 
denote failure. The horizontal dashed line at approximately 15 meV/atom marks an empirical 
upper bound for successful syntheses under the conditions tested; a few unsuccessful trials also 
occur below this value. 
 
 


 
 
22 
 
3. Discussion 
3.1. 
Autonomous synthetic accessibility-guided navigation in multicomponent 
design space 
The CASS framework navigates complex multicomponent NASICON spaces by integrating static 
(𝜋*-./)+, 𝜋&$4"+/"$+() models that combine prior physics-based information and dynamic (𝜋;<, 
𝜋8):3/$"') models that incorporate the data obtained in the experimental campaign. We 
demonstrated that with this approach CASS successfully steers designs toward high phase-purity 
compositions. While Gaussian process (GP)-based Bayesian optimization could also offer rigorous 
global search capabilities, deploying it effectively often requires substantial initial sampling to 
establish useful priors41,42, and, in this setting, complex data pipelines to probabilistically model 
noisy phase-purity estimates from automated XRD refinements. In contrast, by directly embedding 
physical domain knowledge into its cost functions, CASS sidesteps the abrupt phase-boundary 
modeling challenges that can complicate standard stationary GP kernels. Consequently, CASS 
typically requires only one to three experimental iterations to achieve satisfactory phase purity. 
This efficiency relies on the synergy between anchoring the search in theoretical priors and 
iteratively refining local solubility maps via immediate experimental feedback. Broadly, this 
positions CASS as a pragmatic active learning framework capable of identifying single-phase 
regions within high-dimensional chemical spaces, enabling the exploration of complex 
multicomponent materials53,63. Furthermore, the system’s adaptive learning provides resilience 
against systematic uncertainties, such as variations in precursor properties that shift solubility 
limits64,65, by dynamically recalibrating the search to implicitly account for these unmodeled 
factors. This combination of prior knowledge and in-context experimental data has recently been 
employed in large language model (LLM)-driven campaigns66,67. However, as evidenced by the 
few iterations needed to achieve improved phase purity in this study, we expect explicit models 
that map prior knowledge and new experimental data onto the experimental input space, such as 
the CASS approach, to be more efficient, albeit biased toward regions where the mapping holds. 
Configuring the models to be more inclusive systematically decreases this bias, a strategic dial for 
balancing exploration and exploitation within a fixed experimental budget68, potentially useful as 
a tool for agentic LLM-driven campaigns67,69. 


 
 
23 
 
3.2. 
Multi-objective design via modular property surrogates 
By integrating synthetic accessibility estimators with an ionic conductivity surrogate (𝜋89), CASS 
designed and synthesized 23 major-phase NASICONs across 78 total trials in the A-Lab. Notably, 
18 of these compositions fell within or near the high-conductivity target domain. This success is 
driven by a unified, computationally efficient architecture that couples a gradient-free evolutionary 
solver with a gradient-based optimizer to navigate complex cost functions. Because the framework 
is highly modular, it allows for rapid adaptation as physical understanding improves, permitting 
the testing of new hypotheses or the updating of existing models. More broadly, this capability 
unlocks multi-objective optimization within complex solid-solution frameworks. Equipped with 
proven synthetic accessibility optimizers, CASS can readily integrate additional design objectives, 
such as precursor cost, elemental scarcity, and interfacial stability21,22, transforming it into a 
customizable platform for multi-objective solid electrolyte design. 
 
3.3. 
Improvement via interpretable models 
Conductivity measurements validated our design strategy, confirming that compositions falling 
within the 𝜋89 target domain can yield high ionic conductivity. However, exceptions such as 
Na3.5Hf0.7In1.2Ge0.1(SiO4)1.3(PO4)1.7, which sits close to the target domain but fails to achieve high 
conductivity, highlight the limitations of the current predictive model. Despite its favorable 
placement, it is possible that excessive cation size mismatch broadens the site energy distribution 
beyond the percolation optimum63, a factor not yet explicitly modeled. Future framework 
improvements can mitigate this by explicitly selecting compositional descriptors to explain site 
energy distributions or by directly learning their mapping. Another approach would be to bring 
molecular dynamics modeling of ionic conductivity directly in-line with the optimization 
framework, though this would require very significant computing resources to deliver the 
conductivity results in a reasonable time over large parameter spaces. When coupled with an 
autonomous synthesis laboratory32, such modified approaches would transform the framework into 
a powerful tool for real-time hypothesis testing and materials discovery. 
Beyond the capability to easily integrate new physical models, CASS also enables the 
refinement of existing priors by recalibrating them against experimental outcomes. For instance, 
our synthesis data revealed that the practical thermodynamic stability thresholds for NASICONs 
are anion-dependent: the threshold for NASICONs containing only phosphate (PO4) or silicate 


 
 
24 
 
(SiO4) anion groups (~15 meV/atom) is significantly lower than that for mixed-anion 
phosphosilicates ((PO4)3-z(SiO4)z) (~41 meV/atom). This agrees well with a previous study on the 
thermodynamic limits for metastable inorganic materials, which showed that stoichiometry and 
constituent elements affect these boundaries70. Notably, while these empirical limits significantly 
exceed a conservative heuristic of 0 meV/atom48, the observed success rates align with the 
prediction that synthetic inaccessibility scales with energy above the hull. Fundamentally, shifting 
from pure silicate (SiO4) or phosphate (PO4) anion groups into mixed-anion phosphosilicates 
((PO4)3-z(SiO4)z) could increase the diversity of synthesis pathways due to the incorporation of 
new anion groups that would enable the elements within the system to form various intermediates. 
This supports theoretical models linking metastability and selectivity to specific synthesis 
pathways32,53,70–73. Meanwhile, the formation of amorphous Na3Al2(PO4)3 prohibits the crystalline 
version from forming, supporting the understanding that the metastability limit is also governed 
by the relative stability of the amorphous phase70. These findings expose a critical design trade-
off: leveraging lattice distortion via elemental substitution (e.g., in high entropy materials) 
improves ionic conductivity by controlled flattening of site energy landscapes63, but doing so risks 
violating thermodynamic and lattice stability limits, especially when changing anion groups. 
Consequently, rather than rigid cutoffs, the probability distributions of success rate to form a major 
NASICON phase established here could serve as more flexible proxies for synthetic accessibility 
to expand the accessible design space. 
 
3.4. 
Bridging discovery and scale-up through automated bulk synthesis 
This work employs bulk powder solid-state synthesis32,35, closely emulating current industrial 
conditions74 while enabling a more representative evaluation of ionic conductivity with the 
differentiation of intragrain versus intergrain transport. A current limitation is the production of 
loose powder, which requires manual densification (~700 MPa pressing and sintering) for ionic 
conductivity testing within most current laboratories. However, the system's modular architecture 
(spanning CASS, AlabOS75, and hardware32) supports the future integration of automated grinding 
and pressing units, paving the way for autonomous scalable solid electrolyte engineering beyond 
compositional discovery. 
Advancements in automated characterization are also critical to identify the composition of a 
NASICON when it is first detected in a multi-phase sample. Some estimates of the observed 


 
 
25 
 
NASICON composition satisfied lattice parameters constraints (𝜋;<) but missed the actual 
compositions due to the mathematical non-uniqueness of Vegard’s law in high-dimensional 
spaces, where lattice parameters map to solution surfaces rather than unique points. Addressing 
this requires integrating automated phase-specific elemental analysis (e.g., SEM-EDS76). Coupling 
chemical data with structural refinement enables multimodal cost functions that precisely pinpoint 
phase composition and capture key microstructural features, such as elemental distribution and 
particle size, providing deeper insights into processing-performance relationships. 
 
4. Conclusion 
This work establishes a robust system for the accelerated discovery of multicomponent solid-state 
electrolytes by coupling an automated robotic solid-state synthesis laboratory with the Cost-guided 
Autonomous Solid-state Synthesis (CASS) framework. By anchoring the autonomous search in 
interpretable physical descriptors, we enabled model refinement where failed syntheses proved as 
valuable as successes. This closed-loop approach actively recalibrated synthesizability boundaries, 
navigating the high-dimensional phosphosilicate NASICON space to overcome traditional 
bottlenecks of inaccessibility and competing phases, achieving high purity designs in fewer trials 
than those necessary for rigorous global search algorithms to warm up useful initial priors. 
Consequently, the framework discovered 23 unique compositions yielding NASICON as the major 
phase, 18 of which are located within or near the target domain for potentially high ionic 
conductivity. These discoveries include promising fast ionic conductors, such as 
Na3.4Hf0.8Zr0.8In0.3Ga0.1(SiO4)2(PO4), which exhibited measured total and bulk ionic conductivities 
of 0.7 mS/cm and 3.96 mS/cm, respectively. 
We demonstrated that optimizing for synthetic accessibility via interpretable cost functions 
yields improved phase purity, effectively guiding the system toward thermodynamically stable 
regions even though purity was optimized only indirectly, through the synthetic-accessibility and 
impurity-feedback terms rather than an explicit phase purity (wt%) quantified from XRD. 
Integrating experimental feedback allowed us to empirically quantify distinct metastability limits 
for phosphates (~15 meV/atom) and mixed anion phosphosilicates (~41 meV/atom). These refined 
priors provide data-driven design rules, underscoring the necessity of balancing the pursuit of high 
ionic conductivity, often driven by lattice distortion, with thermodynamic stability. 


 
 
26 
 
The modular architecture comprising CASS, AlabOS orchestration, and flexible hardware 
offers a scalable blueprint for an autonomous materials acceleration platform. This framework is 
readily expandable to address higher-order multi-objective challenges, such as particle 
morphology, grain boundary optimization, and electrode compatibility. Ultimately, the successful 
deployment of CASS reinforces the transformative potential of synergistic collaboration between 
autonomous laboratories and domain experts, moving beyond static high-throughput screening 
toward intelligent laboratories capable of navigating the complex landscape of energy materials 
discovery. 


 
 
27 
 
5. Methods 
5.1. 
Automated robotic solid-state synthesis 
Synthesis trials were performed using the automated robotic solid-state synthesis and 
characterization platform within the A-Lab32, orchestrated by AlabOS75, which integrates modular 
stations for precursor dosing and mixing, heating, and solid recovery and XRD sample preparation 
for characterization. The following summarizes the synthesis orchestration steps performed by the 
A-Lab. 
• Precursor dosing and mixing: The powder feeding and slurry handling system was 
custom-built by Labman Automation. A Mitsubishi robotic arm handled sample transfers. 
The following steps were performed sequentially for each individual sample, with multiple 
samples processed in parallel depending on instrument availability. Stoichiometric masses 
of precursors (Sigma-Aldrich, Supplementary Information 6) were dispensed using a 
Mettler Toledo Quantos balance. A 10 wt% excess of Na2CO3 was added to all samples to 
compensate for high-temperature sodium loss77. The powders were wet-mixed in ethanol 
using ten 5 mm zirconia milling balls within a plastic vial in a Hauschild Smart DAC250 
centrifugal mixer. The resulting slurry was then transferred to alumina crucibles via a 
robotic pipettor (Sartorius) and dried at 80°C. 
• Heating: A Mitsubishi robotic arm transferred the dried samples to a transfer station. From 
there, a UR5e robotic arm (Universal Robots) mounted on a linearly actuated rail loaded 
them into box furnaces, subsequently unloading them upon completion of the heating 
profile. The thermal protocol comprised an initial ramp to 300°C (2°C/min), a second ramp 
to 1100°C (5°C/min), a 12-hour dwell at this peak temperature, and natural cooling within 
the closed furnace down to 300°C. At this threshold, the furnace door automatically opened 
to facilitate faster cooling. 
• Characterization: A third robotic arm performed the following steps sequentially for each 
individual sample, with multiple samples processed in parallel depending on instrument 
availability. Sintered samples were recovered and ground using a modified Fritsch Mini-
mill Pulverisette 23. They were then prepared on a clean (verified by scanning prior to 
preparation) XRD sample holder (> 100 mg of powder) and loaded into the diffractometer, 
followed by automated unloading upon scan completion. Diffraction scans were performed 
using an Aeris Minerals diffractometer (Malvern Panalytical). 


 
 
28 
 
5.2. 
Composition design algorithm 
The total cost function (Π*+"#,) evaluated by CASS presents a potentially rugged, non-convex 
landscape, defined as:  
Π*+"#, = 𝑤=𝜋*-./)+ + 𝑤>𝜋&$4"+/"$+( + 𝑤?𝜋89 + 𝑤@𝜋8):3/$"' + 𝑤A𝜋;< 
𝑤= = 𝑤> = 𝑤? = 𝑤A = 50; 𝑤@ = 1 
Each component (𝑤$𝜋$) of the total cost function is constructed to be as simple as possible. 
Mimicking a rectified linear unit (ReLU), each term incorporates a linear penalty that evaluates to 
0 when a design falls within the preferred domain and increases linearly as it deviates. We 
deliberately chose this formulation over rigid step functions so that individual components still 
provide non-zero directional gradients to help guide the solver toward preferred regions. 
To navigate this complex terrain, CASS utilizes a hybrid optimization architecture that couples 
a Real-Coded Genetic Algorithm (RCGA) with a Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno (BFGS) 
gradient-based solver. Purely gradient-based methods are prone to "greedy" local convergence in 
such landscapes, where the solver becomes trapped in the nearest local minimum rather than 
exploring the broader search space. To overcome this, the RCGA provides essential global 
exploration. Unlike purely random sampling, which lacks memory and search direction, the RCGA 
leverages information persistence across G=4 generations. By employing deterministic truncation 
to preserve the top P=30 candidates per generation and randomized blended crossover for the 
reproduction of K=30 offspring, the algorithm effectively focuses computational effort on 
promising domains rather than independent, blind guesses. To prevent premature convergence in 
local minima, stochastic injection (N=40 random candidates per generation) maintains the global 
exploration benefits of random sampling. This evolutionary warm start identifies the most viable 
region for the global minimum, which is then refined via BFGS to ensure rapid local convergence 
and high numerical precision. 
 
5.3. 
𝝅𝑻𝒉𝒆𝒓𝒎𝒐 formulation 
For each candidate composition (Υ), where “I” and “A” represent synthetically inaccessible and 
accessible respectively, the 𝜋*-./)+ cost function is defined as: 
𝜋*-./)+(Υ) = ?𝑃(𝑦= "I"|Υ),
if Class (Υ) = "I"
0,
if Class (Υ) = "A" 


 
 
29 
 
where Class (Υ) is determined by a support vector classifier (SVC), and 𝑃(𝑦= "I"|Υ) is the Platt-
scaled probability48,51 from the SVC output. 
The 𝜋*-./)+ SVC was defined by adjusting NASICON thermodynamic stability descriptors 
and energy threshold (𝐸"-/.4-+,2) from a previously published study48. This adjustment ensured 
that 524 experimental NASICON compositions, sourced from text-mined literature and the 
Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD)78, were correctly classified as synthetically 
accessible, while also enabling rapid computational evaluation. Specifically, the Ewald energy 
(𝐸01#,2) was excluded from the descriptor set and the 𝐸"-/.4-+,2 was increased from 0 to 62.22 
meV/atom. To validate the classifier’s ability to accurately separate synthetically accessible from 
inaccessible NASICON compositions, we evaluated its performance scores before and after the 
descriptor modifications, as well as after the 𝐸"-/.4-+,2 increased. Using five-fold cross-validation, 
the final classifier achieved an average test accuracy of 87.25%, a recall of 86.91%, and an F1-
score of 84.78%, demonstrating that robust performance was maintained following these changes 
(details in Supplementary Information 7). 
 
5.4. 
𝝅𝑫𝒊𝒔𝒕𝒐𝒓𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏 formulation 
Recognizing that local lattice distortion governs the stability of multicomponent systems like 
high-entropy alloys55 and solid solutions53,54, we bound this factor by using 𝑅5
!*& (standard 
deviation of the metal cation radii) as a quantitative descriptor. Because the reference dataset of 
524 crystalline compositions extends only to 7-cation systems, we conservatively apply the 
stability limit observed for 7 cations to all compositions with higher complexity. Formally, 
𝜋&$4"+/"$+( is defined as: 
𝜋&$4"+/"$+((Υ) = N
0,
if 𝑅5
!*& ≤𝑅5,)#H
!*&
(𝑛(Υ))
𝑅5
!*& − 𝑅5,)#H
!*&
O𝑛(Υ)P,
otherwise
 
where 𝑛(Υ) is the number of cations of the candidate composition (Υ) and 𝑅5,)#H
!*&
(𝑛(Υ)) is the 
maximum limit of 𝑅5
!*&. 
 
 


 
 
30 
 
5.5. 
𝝅𝑰𝑪 formulation 
The ionic conductivity cost function (𝜋89) sums linear penalties for mean cation radius, sodium 
content, and polyanion center ion radius (detailed in Supplementary Information 8) as adapted 
from a boundary proposed in a previous study25. 
𝜋89 = 𝜋IJ7 + 𝜋689 + 𝜋IJ: 
Where 𝜋IJ7, 𝜋689, and 𝜋IJ: represent the cost components bounding the average cationic radius, 
sodium content, and average polyanion center ion radius, respectively. 
 
5.6. 
𝝅𝑰𝒎𝒑𝒖𝒓𝒊𝒕𝒚 formulation 
Following each synthesis trial, the XRD characterization identifies the set of cations present in 
detected impurities (𝑉$):), including P and Si but excluding Na since it is defined by the cation 
and anion ratios alongside the charge neutrality constraint, based on XRD phase analysis. We 
define a Boolean indicator function, 𝑚(Υ, 𝑉$):, Υ:/$+/), which evaluates to True if the normalized 
concentration of any element 𝑖∈𝑉$): in the candidate composition Υ exceeds its concentration in 
the prior synthesis attempt Υ:/$+/. The cost function is formally defined as: 
𝜋8):3/$"'(Υ) = ? 3 + ΣK𝑐$,
If 𝑚(Υ, 𝑉$):, ΥLMKNM)
ΣK𝑐$,
otherwise
 
where 𝑐$ represents the concentration of element 𝑖 normalized by its crystallographic site 
multiplicity. The static penalty of 3 serves as a barrier against increasing the concentration of 
impurity-prone elements, while the gradient term ∑𝑐$
$
 drives the optimization toward their 
minimization or complete removal. If no impurities are detected in the prior trial, 𝜋$):3/$"' is set 
to 0. We understand that this is a conservative approximation as it is possible that the presence of 
an element 𝑖 in the impurities is strongly influenced by another element 𝑗. 
 
5.7. 
Fine-tuned Vegard’s approximation and 𝝅𝑳𝑷 formulation 
Two multiple linear regression models predict lattice parameter 𝑎 and cell volume 𝑉, respectively, 
based on 𝑅)5 (average cationic radius), 𝑅)7 (average polyanion center ion anionic radius), and NOP 
(Na content) as the input features (predictors). The decision to employ two separate models is 
based on empirical observations of the correlations between these predictors and the respective 
outputs (responses). To improve accuracy within a specific chemical space, we applied adaptive 


 
 
31 
 
fine-tuning by assigning a weight of 𝑤= 10,000 to local compositions during fitting. This large 
weighting essentially forces the model to fit the compositions inside the target chemical space, 
while utilizing out-of-space compositions for general guidance when local data is sparse. The cost 
function is defined as the mean percentage difference between predicted and experimentally 
refined parameters (𝑎, 𝑐, 𝑉). 
 
𝜋;< = 1
3 b
|𝑎QI& −𝑎R|
𝑎QI&
+
|𝑐QI& −𝑐R|
𝑐QI&
+
|𝑉QI& −𝑉R|
𝑉QI&
c × 100% 
 
where 𝑎QI&, 𝑐QI&, and 𝑉QI& are the unit cell 𝑎 and 𝑐 lattice parameters and volume, respectively, 
obtained from the experimentally refined values. The variables with the Υ subscript denote the 
corresponding structural values predicted by the regressors. Training and testing details are 
provided in Supplementary Information 9. 
 
5.8. 
XRD measurement, refinement, and phase analysis 
Powder XRD measurements were conducted using Cu-Kα radiation over a 2θ range of 10°-
100° (8 minutes duration, ~0.01° step size, and a detector active length of 5.542° in 2θ), with 
diffractograms automatically uploaded to a central server for analysis. For structural refinement, a 
set of candidate rhombohedral NASICON structures with varying Na-site occupancies was 
generated, utilizing initial lattice parameters predicted by the fine-tuned Vegard’s approximation. 
Rietveld refinement to extract the lattice parameters of the NASICON phase was performed for 
each candidate using BGMN software79, and the solution yielding the lowest weighted residual 
error (𝑅1:) was selected. To ensure the refined phase corresponded to the target NASICON 
structure, its validity was confirmed by comparing the extracted 𝑎 lattice parameter and unit cell 
volume against model predictions. A phase was flagged as unlikely to form if deviations exceeded 
a composite threshold of the model's intrinsic uncertainty (95% confidence interval) plus 15% of 
the model-predicted end-member range within the chemical space (Supplementary Information 
1). 
Subsequently, phases were identified using the DARA80 algorithm. Non-NASICON phases 
were classified as impurities; if multiple NASICON phases were detected, those with lower weight 
percentages were also deemed impurities. The compositions of these impurity phases are the input 


 
 
32 
 
for the 𝜋8):3/$"' cost function. The phase search space comprised generated NASICON structures 
alongside known phases from the ICSD78 and Crystallography Open Database (COD)81. However, 
to mitigate combinatorial explosion in complex compositional spaces (≥ 7 elements), the search 
pool was restricted to common phases identified during attempts in lower-dimensional subspaces. 
The samples selected for ionic conductivity measurements underwent comprehensive manual 
phase identification and refinement using GSAS-II82 software. The following parameters were 
refined: background, sample displacement and transparency, phase fractions, isotropic crystallite 
size and microstrain, lattice parameters, and surface roughness. 
 
5.9. 
Purity Score and calibration 
Because automated phase search and refinement often fail to capture all impurity phases, we 
assessed phase purity using the Estimated Purity (EP). This metric is defined as the ratio of the 
integrated intensity of the refined NASICON phase to the total background-subtracted pattern 
intensity83 (which captures residuals due to both unidentified impurities and suboptimal refinement 
parameters): 
EP(%) =
|I67!89S6|
|𝐼67!89S6| + |𝐼I.4$23#,| × 100% 
To normalize this metric against experimental baselines and decouple physical purity from 
automated refinement artifacts, we convert EP into a Purity Score. Using a calibration set of high-
purity samples (Supplementary Information 10), we established a reference baseline (EPTLLUM =
78.33%) representing negligible impurity content. To ensure the synthesized phase matches the 
design, we enforce a strict stoichiometric validation check. The Purity Score is calculated as: 
 
Purity Score = q
0.0,
If |ΔL| > (δVNWUX+0.15⋅RYLPZU)
min b1.0,
EP
EPTLLUM
c ,
otherwise
 
 
A score of 1.0 indicates a high-purity sample, while a score > 0.7 identifies a major NASICON 
phase. However, a sample is reclassified as a failure (Purity Score = 0.0) if the absolute deviation 
(|ΔL|) of the 𝑎 lattice parameter or the unit cell volume from its predicted value exceeds the 
composite threshold defined by the model's intrinsic uncertainty (δVNWUX) plus 15% of the 


 
 
33 
 
parameter’s maximum range (RYLPZU) within the chemical space, as defined by the predicted lattice 
parameters of the NASICON end members. The value of 15% follows from the calibration against 
the pseudobinary phosphate NASICONs whose single-cation end members were themselves 
synthesized in this work (Supplementary Information 1). 
 
5.10. Multimodal NASICON composition analysis 
NASICON phase composition for the selected samples was resolved by coupling lattice-
parameter and thermodynamic stability screening with automated SEM-EDS (Thermo Fisher 
Phenom XL G2) using the AutoEMX framework76. The analysis followed a three-step process: (1) 
automated SEM-EDS data acquisition, filtering, and k-means clustering; (2) identification of the 
most likely experimental NASICON composition via hybrid optimization minimizing 𝜋*-./)+ 
and Euclidean distance to centroids, constrained by lattice parameter validity; and (3) final phase 
identification, including impurities, conditional on the XRD refinement. Details in 
Supplementary Information 11. 
 
5.11. Ionic conductivity measurement 
Ionic conductivity was measured by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) on 
sintered pellets of the as-synthesized powders. Powders were ball-milled, cold-pressed into green 
bodies, and sintered near their synthesis temperature to over 85% of theoretical density 
(Supplementary Data), then rapidly cooled to preserve the target phase. Indium electrodes were 
applied and impedance recorded from 7 MHz to 100 mHz. Spectra were fit to an equivalent circuit 
from which bulk, grain-boundary, and total ionic conductivities were extracted. Activation 
energies were obtained from Arrhenius fits of subsets of temperature-dependent measurements 
from -30 to 85 °C. Full instrument settings, pellet-processing parameters, the equivalent-circuit 
definition, the fitting procedure, and the activation-energy analysis are provided in 
Supplementary Information 3. 
 
5.12. Determining the stabilizing energy above hull threshold (𝑬𝒇𝒊𝒓𝒔𝒕 𝒔𝒕𝒂𝒃𝒍𝒆 𝒕𝒉𝒓𝒆𝒔𝒉𝒐𝒍𝒅) 
The 𝜋*-./)+ linear SVC uses machine-learned descriptors48 to rule out synthetically 
inaccessible compositions. It uses a large training data set of NASICONs for which Ehull is 
computed and augmented with the ideal configurational entropy (𝐸-3,,,$2.#,)48. The SVC used in 


 
 
34 
 
this work used an 𝐸"-/.4-+,2 of 62.22 meV/atom for the hull energy to divide synthesizable 
NASICONs from non-synthesizable ones. To evaluate if this value is optimal, we can retrain the 
SVC with different values for this threshold on the hull energy. We trained 83 individual SVCs 
using the 3,881 unique NASICON composition and 𝐸-3,,,$2.#, pairs from the previous study48 
using 𝐸"-/.4-+,2 values ranging from 0 to 82 meV/atom in increments of 1 meV/atom (T = 1000 
K was chosen to maintain magnitude comparability with the prior study48). We trained the 
classifiers using five-fold cross-validation, selecting the models with an accuracy closest to the 
fold average as the final classifiers. These 83 SVCs act as variants of 𝜋*-./)+ that disqualify 
compositions exceeding their specific 𝐸"-/.4-+,2. For each target composition in our experimental 
campaign, 𝐸D$/4" 4"#F,. "-/.4-+,2 was obtained by identifying the SVC with the lowest Ehull 
threshold used in its training that identified the phase as stable. 
 
 


 
 
35 
 
Author contributions 
B.R., Y.Z., and G.C. developed the theoretical formalism. B.R. and Y.Z. developed the 
experimental formalism. B.R. developed the CASS design system (optimization scheme, design 
rules adjustment, and cost function definition); conceived and planned synthesis experiments; 
developed NASICON structure generation and lattice parameter-composition relation; executed 
and verified the automated XRD analysis results; analyzed the synthesizability data; and wrote the 
manuscript. B.R. and Y.F. developed the synthesis and XRD characterization automation and data 
handling. B.R., Y.F., D.M., and M.J.M. developed the automation for solid handling. T.H. 
developed the text-mining pipeline for NASICON compositions and ionic conductivity. B.R., 
X.Y., and H.Q. prepared the as-synthesized samples for EIS characterization. B.R. and A.G. 
carried out the multimodal XRD, SEM, and EDS measurement and analysis. B.R., Y.F., L.N.W., 
D.M., and M.J.M. executed synthesis experiments. Y.F. and M.J.M. developed the automated 
XRD refinement and phase search. B.O. contributed to the theoretical formalism for synthetic 
accessibility of NASICONs. Y.Z. supervised the development of synthesis and XRD 
characterization automation and execution; and supervised the sample preparation for EIS 
measurement. G.C. supervised the project. All authors contributed to the manuscript revision. 
Data availability 
The comprehensive dataset supporting this study is publicly available in the figshare repository at 
https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.31829305. This deposit includes the refined XRD patterns 
(incorporating both NASICON and impurity phases), SEM images and EDS clustering results, and 
EIS fitting data for the six selected samples. Additionally, the repository contains comprehensive 
synthesis results for 345 samples, comprising 281 phosphosilicates (78 of which were designed 
with ionic conductivity considerations) and 64 phosphates and silicates, indexed by their global 
target composition. These high-throughput data include expected versus refined lattice parameters, 
Purity Scores, lattice parameter validations, and refined X-ray diffractograms (NASICON phase 
only), alongside the refined XRD patterns of the high-purity samples used for Purity Score 
calibration. All other raw data are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable 
request. 
 


 
 
36 
 
Code availability 
Code for the design algorithm, cost function implementations, Vegard’s approximation, and 
composition verification is available at https://github.com/CederGroupHub/cass. This repository 
also includes the scripts used for the multimodal (XRD and SEM-EDS) NASICON composition 
analysis and general plotting. Additional scripts for raw data visualization are available in the 
figshare repository at https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.31829305. 
 
Supporting Information 
Supporting Information and Supplementary Data accompany this manuscript. 
 
Acknowledgement 
This research was primarily supported as part of the Energy Storage Research Alliance (ESRA), 
an Energy Innovation Hub funded by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Science, 
Basic Energy Sciences (BES), under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357 for the development of 
the Cost-guided Autonomous Solid-state Synthesis (CASS) framework, synthesis planning, 
electrochemical characterization, and overall project leadership. Additional support was provided 
by the D2S2 program within the U.S. DOE, Office of Science, BES, Materials Sciences and 
Engineering Division under Contract No. DE-AC02-05-CH11231 for the development of 
automated solid-state synthesis and XRD analysis workflows, and multimodal phase analysis 
using SEM-EDS and XRD. Implementation of the ideas in this work as an AI-campaign was 
supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials 
Sciences and Engineering Division, and the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research 
(ASCR) under Contract No. DE-AC02-05-CH11231 within the LBNL GENESIS program. B.R. 
acknowledges support from the Kavli ENSI Graduate Student Fellowship. L.N.W. acknowledges 
funding support from the BIDMaP postdoctoral fellowship. The authors thank Marilyn Sargent at 
Berkeley Lab for capturing photos of the A-Lab. 
 
Conflict of Interest 
The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
 


 
 
37 
 
References 
1. Li, C. et al. NaSICON: A promising solid electrolyte for solid‐state sodium batteries. 
Interdisciplinary Materials 1, 396–416 (2022). 
2. Myung, S.-T. et al. Nickel-Rich Layered Cathode Materials for Automotive Lithium-Ion 
Batteries: Achievements and Perspectives. ACS Energy Lett. 2, 196–223 (2017). 
3. Banerjee, D. & Williams, J. C. Perspectives on Titanium Science and Technology. Acta 
Materialia 61, 844–879 (2013). 
4. Li, S. et al. Development and applications of aluminum alloys for aerospace industry. 
Journal of Materials Research and Technology 27, 944–983 (2023). 
5. Lo, K. H., Shek, C. H. & Lai, J. K. L. Recent developments in stainless steels. Materials 
Science and Engineering: R: Reports 65, 39–104 (2009). 
6. Pollock, T. M. & Tin, S. Nickel-Based Superalloys for Advanced Turbine Engines: 
Chemistry, Microstructure and Properties. Journal of Propulsion and Power 22, 361–374 
(2006). 
7. Zhou, Y. et al. Composition Optimization in Alloy Design for Nickel-Based Single Crystal 
Superalloy: A Review. Metals 15, 793 (2025). 
8. George, E. P., Raabe, D. & Ritchie, R. O. High-entropy alloys. Nat Rev Mater 4, 515–534 
(2019). 
9. Saliba, M. et al. Cesium-containing triple cation perovskite solar cells: improved stability, 
reproducibility and high efficiency. Energy Environ. Sci. 9, 1989–1997 (2016). 
10. Vurgaftman, I., Meyer, J. R. & Ram-Mohan, L. R. Band parameters for III–V compound 
semiconductors and their alloys. Journal of Applied Physics 89, 5815–5875 (2001). 
11. Li, A., Fu, C., Zhao, X. & Zhu, T. High-Performance Mg3 Sb 2- x  Bi x  Thermoelectrics: 
Progress and Perspective. Research 2020, 2020/1934848 (2020). 


 
 
38 
 
12. Ouyang, B. & Zeng, Y. The rise of high-entropy battery materials. Nat Commun 15, 973 
(2024). 
13. Si, H. et al. Solid‐State Sodium‐Ion Batteries: Theories, Challenges and Perspectives. 
Chemistry A European J 31, e202403247 (2025). 
14. Yao, A., Benson, S. M. & Chueh, W. C. Critically assessing sodium-ion technology 
roadmaps and scenarios for techno-economic competitiveness against lithium-ion batteries. 
Nat Energy 10, 404–416 (2025). 
15. Radjendirane, A. C. et al. Overview of Inorganic Electrolytes for All-Solid-State Sodium 
Batteries. Langmuir 40, 16690–16712 (2024). 
16. Xiao, Y. et al. Understanding interface stability in solid-state batteries. Nat Rev Mater 5, 
105–126 (2019). 
17. Shi, K. et al. Recent Progress and Prospects on Sodium-Ion Battery and All-Solid-State 
Sodium Battery: A Promising Choice of Future Batteries for Energy Storage. Energy Fuels 
38, 9280–9319 (2024). 
18. Vaalma, C., Buchholz, D., Weil, M. & Passerini, S. A cost and resource analysis of sodium-
ion batteries. Nat Rev Mater 3, 18013 (2018). 
19. Zhao, C. et al. Solid‐State Sodium Batteries. Advanced Energy Materials 8, 1703012 (2018). 
20. Lacivita, V., Wang, Y., Bo, S.-H. & Ceder, G. Ab initio investigation of the stability of 
electrolyte/electrode interfaces in all-solid-state Na batteries. J. Mater. Chem. A 7, 8144–
8155 (2019). 
21. Ran, L. et al. Sc, Ge co-doping NASICON boosts solid-state sodium ion batteries’ 
performance. Energy Storage Materials 40, 282–291 (2021). 


 
 
39 
 
22. Wang, X. et al. Sc/Mg Co‐Doping in Na3 Zr2 Si2 PO12 Solid‐State Electrolytes Enables 
Outstanding Performance of Sodium Metal Batteries. Advanced Science e15463 (2025) 
doi:10.1002/advs.202515463. 
23. Yang, S. et al. Regulating the Interfacial Performance of All-Solid-State Sodium Batteries 
Using Lanthanum Substitution in a Na3 Zr2 Si2 PO12 Solid Electrolyte. ACS Appl. Energy 
Mater. 7, 9863–9871 (2024). 
24. Xu, J., Tao, H., Deng, Z., Yang, X. & Fan, L.-Z. Simultaneously enhancing ionic 
conductivity and interfacial stability by Fe2O3 for solid-state sodium metal batteries. Journal 
of Materiomics 10, 1243–1251 (2024). 
25. Wang, J. et al. Design principles for NASICON super-ionic conductors. Nat Commun 14, 
5210 (2023). 
26. Cheng, E. J. et al. Correlation between mechanical properties and ionic conductivity of 
polycrystalline sodium superionic conductors: A relative density-dominant relationship. 
Materials Today Energy 44, 101644 (2024). 
27. Shen, L., Yang, J., Liu, G., Avdeev, M. & Yao, X. High ionic conductivity and dendrite-
resistant NASICON solid electrolyte for all-solid-state sodium batteries. Materials Today 
Energy 20, 100691 (2021). 
28. Böger, T. et al. On the Thermal Conductivity and Local Lattice Dynamical Properties of 
NASICON Solid Electrolytes. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 146, 32678–32688 (2024). 
29. Samiee, M. et al. Divalent-doped Na3Zr2Si2PO12 natrium superionic conductor: Improving 
the ionic conductivity via simultaneously optimizing the phase and chemistry of the primary 
and secondary phases. Journal of Power Sources 347, 229–237 (2017). 


 
 
40 
 
30. Xu, C. et al. Guiding Design of Mn‐Rich Phosphate Cathodes with Less Intrinsic Antisite 
Defects. Angew Chem Int Ed 64, e202502758 (2025). 
31. Jain, A. et al. A high-throughput infrastructure for density functional theory calculations. 
Computational Materials Science 50, 2295–2310 (2011). 
32. Szymanski, N. J. et al. An autonomous laboratory for the accelerated synthesis of inorganic 
materials. Nature 624, 86–91 (2023). 
33. MacLeod, B. P. et al. Self-driving laboratory for accelerated discovery of thin-film materials. 
Sci. Adv. 6, eaaz8867 (2020). 
34. MacLeod, B. P. et al. A self-driving laboratory advances the Pareto front for material 
properties. Nat Commun 13, 995 (2022). 
35. Omidvar, M. et al. Accelerated discovery of perovskite solid solutions through automated 
materials synthesis and characterization. Nat Commun 15, 6554 (2024). 
36. Woods-Robinson, R. et al. Assessing High-Throughput Descriptors for Prediction of 
Transparent Conductors. Chem. Mater. 30, 8375–8389 (2018). 
37. Nikolaev, P. et al. Autonomy in materials research: a case study in carbon nanotube growth. 
npj Comput Mater 2, 16031 (2016). 
38. Waelder, R., Kim, W., Pitt, M. A., Myung, J. I. & Maruyama, B. Multi-objective Bayesian 
optimization of carbon nanotube yield and diameter control at synthesis. APL Machine 
Learning 3, 026114 (2025). 
39. Epps, R. W., Volk, A. A., Ibrahim, M. Y. S. & Abolhasani, M. Universal self-driving 
laboratory for accelerated discovery of materials and molecules. Chem 7, 2541–2545 (2021). 
40. Burger, B. et al. A mobile robotic chemist. Nature 583, 237–241 (2020). 


 
 
41 
 
41. Harada, M. et al. Bayesian-optimization-guided experimental search of NASICON-type 
solid electrolytes for all-solid-state Li-ion batteries. J. Mater. Chem. A 8, 15103–15109 
(2020). 
42. Fukuda, H. et al. Bayesian optimisation with transfer learning for NASICON-type solid 
electrolytes for all-solid-state Li-metal batteries. RSC Adv. 12, 30696–30703 (2022). 
43. Will-Cole, A. R. et al. Application of Bayesian Optimization and Regression Analysis to 
Ferromagnetic Materials Development. IEEE Trans. Magn. 58, 1–8 (2022). 
44. Wang, Z. et al. Active learning design of bcc solid solution alloys with gigapascal strength 
and elemental metal–level ductility. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 123, e2530922123 (2026). 
45. Kusne, A. G. et al. On-the-fly closed-loop materials discovery via Bayesian active learning. 
Nat Commun 11, 5966 (2020). 
46. Raccuglia, P. et al. Machine-learning-assisted materials discovery using failed experiments. 
Nature 533, 73–76 (2016). 
47. Karniadakis, G. E. et al. Physics-informed machine learning. Nat Rev Phys 3, 422–440 
(2021). 
48. Ouyang, B. et al. Synthetic accessibility and stability rules of NASICONs. Nat Commun 12, 
5752 (2021). 
49. Ong, S. P. et al. Python Materials Genomics (pymatgen): A robust, open-source python 
library for materials analysis. Computational Materials Science 68, 314–319 (2013). 
50. Hart, G. L. W. & Forcade, R. W. Algorithm for generating derivative structures. Phys. Rev. B 
77, 224115 (2008). 
51. Platt, J. Probabilistic Outputs for Support Vector Machines and Comparisons to Regularized 
Likelihood Methods. Adv. Large Margin Classif. 10, 61–74 (2000). 


 
 
42 
 
52. Sun, W. et al. The thermodynamic scale of inorganic crystalline metastability. Sci. Adv. 2, 
e1600225 (2016). 
53. Almishal, S. S. I. et al. Thermodynamics-inspired high-entropy oxide synthesis. Nat 
Commun 16, 8211 (2025). 
54. Oses, C., Toher, C. & Curtarolo, S. High-entropy ceramics. Nat Rev Mater 5, 295–309 
(2020). 
55. Zhang, Y., Zhou, Y. J., Lin, J. P., Chen, G. L. & Liaw, P. K. Solid‐Solution Phase Formation 
Rules for Multi‐component Alloys. Adv Eng Mater 10, 534–538 (2008). 
56. Ma, Q. et al. Room temperature demonstration of a sodium superionic conductor with grain 
conductivity in excess of 0.01 S cm−1 and its primary applications in symmetric battery 
cells. J. Mater. Chem. A 7, 7766–7776 (2019). 
57. Michalak, A., Behara, S. & M, A. R. Reinvestigation of Na5GdSi4O12: A Potentially Better 
Solid Electrolyte than Sodium β Alumina for Solid-State Sodium Batteries. ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 16, 7112–7118 (2024). 
58. Sun, G. et al. Na5YSi4O12: A sodium superionic conductor for ultrastable quasi-solid-state 
sodium-ion batteries. Energy Storage Materials 41, 196–202 (2021). 
59. Li, Y. et al. A P2-Type Layered Superionic Conductor Ga-Doped Na2Zn2TeO6 for All-
Solid-State Sodium-Ion Batteries. Chemistry – A European Journal 24, 1057–1061 (2018). 
60. Li, Y. et al. New P2-Type Honeycomb-Layered Sodium-Ion Conductor: Na2Mg2TeO6. ACS 
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10, 15760–15766 (2018). 
61. Zeng, G. A necessary condition for a good binning algorithm in credit scoring. ams 8, 3229–
3242 (2014). 


 
 
43 
 
62. Gammond, L. V. D. et al. Structure of crystalline and amorphous materials in the NASICON 
system Na1+ x Al x Ge2− x (PO4)3. The Journal of Chemical Physics 155, 074501 (2021). 
63. Zeng, Y. et al. High-entropy mechanism to boost ionic conductivity. Science 378, 1320–
1324 (2022). 
64. Lin, M., Gottstein, G. & Shvindlerman, L. S. Generalized Gibbs-Thomson equation for 
nanoparticles at grain boundaries. Acta Materialia 129, 361–365 (2017). 
65. Perez, M. Gibbs-Thomson effects in phase transformations. Scripta Materialia 52, 709–712 
(2005). 
66. Boiko, D. A., MacKnight, R., Kline, B. & Gomes, G. Autonomous chemical research with 
large language models. Nature 624, 570–578 (2023). 
67. Fei, Y. et al. Agentic LLM Reasoning in a Self-Driving Laboratory for Air-Sensitive 
Lithium Halide Spinel Conductors. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2604.11957 
(2026). 
68. Zhang, Z. et al. A multimodal robotic platform for multi-element electrocatalyst discovery. 
Nature 647, 390–396 (2025). 
69. Huang, X. et al. CASCADE: Cumulative Agentic Skill Creation through Autonomous 
Development and Evolution. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2512.23880 (2026). 
70. Aykol, M., Dwaraknath, S. S., Sun, W. & Persson, K. A. Thermodynamic limit for synthesis 
of metastable inorganic materials. Sci. Adv. 4, eaaq0148 (2018). 
71. Divilov, S. et al. Disordered enthalpy–entropy descriptor for high-entropy ceramics 
discovery. Nature 625, 66–73 (2024). 
72. McDermott, M. J. et al. Assessing Thermodynamic Selectivity of Solid-State Reactions for 
the Predictive Synthesis of Inorganic Materials. ACS Cent. Sci. 9, 1957–1975 (2023). 


 
 
44 
 
73. Szymanski, N. J., Nevatia, P., Bartel, C. J., Zeng, Y. & Ceder, G. Autonomous and dynamic 
precursor selection for solid-state materials synthesis. Nat Commun 14, 6956 (2023). 
74. Schnell, J. et al. All-solid-state lithium-ion and lithium metal batteries – paving the way to 
large-scale production. Journal of Power Sources 382, 160–175 (2018). 
75. Fei, Y. et al. AlabOS: a Python-based reconfigurable workflow management framework for 
autonomous laboratories. Digital Discovery 3, 2275–2288 (2024). 
76. Giunto, A. et al. Accurate SEM-EDS quantification, automation, and machine learning 
enable high-throughput compositional characterization of powders. Nat Commun 17, 9735 
(2026). 
77. Narayanan, S., Reid, S., Butler, S. & Thangadurai, V. Sintering temperature, excess sodium, 
and phosphorous dependencies on morphology and ionic conductivity of NASICON 
Na3Zr2Si2PO12. Solid State Ionics 331, 22–29 (2019). 
78. Zagorac, D., Müller, H., Ruehl, S., Zagorac, J. & Rehme, S. Recent developments in the 
Inorganic Crystal Structure Database: theoretical crystal structure data and related features. J 
Appl Crystallogr 52, 918–925 (2019). 
79. Bergmann, J. & Taut, T. Manual: Rietveld Analysis Program BGMN. (Dr. Jörg Bergmann, 
Dresden, Germany, 2005). 
80. Fei, Y., McDermott, M. J., Rom, C. L., Wang, S. & Ceder, G. Dara: Automated Multiple-
Hypothesis Phase Identification and Refinement from Powder X-ray Diffraction. Chem. 
Mater. 38, 1364–1376 (2026). 
81. Gražulis, S. et al. Crystallography Open Database (COD): an open-access collection of 
crystal structures and platform for world-wide collaboration. Nucleic Acids Research 40, 
D420–D427 (2012). 


 
 
45 
 
82. Toby, B. H. & Von Dreele, R. B. GSAS-II : the genesis of a modern open-source all purpose 
crystallography software package. J Appl Crystallogr 46, 544–549 (2013). 
83. Chen, J. et al. Navigating phase diagram complexity to guide robotic inorganic materials 
synthesis. Nat. Synth 3, 606–614 (2024). 
 


 
 
1 
 
Combining physical models with dynamically acquired experimental 
information for the optimization of multicomponent NASICON fast ionic 
conductors in a self-driving laboratory (Supplementary Information) 
 
Bernardus Rendy1,2,3, Yuxing Fei1,2, Tanjin He4, Xiaochen Yang1,2, Andrea Giunto1,2, Lauren N. 
Walters5,1, David Milsted2, Hao Qiu1, Matthew J. McDermott2, Bin Ouyang2,6, Yan Zeng2,7,*, 
Gerbrand Ceder1,2,3,* 
 
Table of Contents 
 
1. Provenance of the 15% off-stoichiometry tolerance 
2. Multimodal NASICON composition analysis results 
3. Measurement of ionic conductivity and activation energies 
4. Ideal configurational entropy formulation and 𝐸!"##,%&'(# 
5. Empirical metastability limits of phosphate, silicate, and phosphosilicate NASICONs 
6. Precursor details 
7. Support vector classifier (SVC) test set performance comparison (5-fold cross-validation) 
8. Ionic conductivity cost-function components 
9. Vegard’s approximation training and details 
10. Calibration for high purity and major NASICON samples 
11. Multimodal NASICON composition analysis 
12. Supplementary Figures 1-19 
 
 
1 Department of Materials Science & Engineering, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 
94720, USA 
2 Materials Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA 
3 Energy Storage Research Alliance, Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 South Cass Avenue, Lemont, IL 
60439, USA 
4 Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 South Cass Avenue, Lemont, IL 60439, USA 
5 Bakar Institute of Digital Materials for the Planet, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA 
6 Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235, 
USA 
7 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235, USA 
* Corresponding authors: gceder@berkeley.edu (G.C.), yan.zeng@vanderbilt.edu (Y.Z.) 


 
 
2 
 
1. Provenance of the 15% off-stoichiometry tolerance 
The validity check compares the refined 𝑎 lattice parameter and unit-cell volume V with the fine-
tuned model (Supplementary Information 9) predictions, and flags the target phase as unlikely 
to have formed when either deviates by more than the model uncertainty plus 15% of the range 
between the model-predicted end-member values (Methods). The tolerance accommodates slight 
off-stoichiometry, potentially arising from the loss of volatile components at synthesis 
temperatures1. This section reports the measurements from which the 15% was set. 
The position of the refined phase relative to the two single-cation end members A and B is given 
by the fractional coordinate: 
𝑥(𝑞) = 𝑞)'*%+'& − 𝑞,
|𝑞- − 𝑞,|
= 𝑞)'*%+'& − 𝑞,
R./012
 
where q is either the 𝑎 or V, and 𝑞3 and 𝑞4 (with 𝑞4 > 𝑞3) are its measured values at the end 
members A and B. R./012 = |𝑞- − 𝑞,| is the range of 𝑞 across the pair. 
For an equimolar target following Vegard’s law2, 𝑥(𝑞) = 0.5, and the distance from the target 
along the pair is: 
Δ𝑥'5"%67#() 9():'9 = |𝑥 (𝑞) −0.5| 
The Vegard’s-approximation models for 𝑎 and V carry an intrinsic uncertainty δ;<=2> = 2𝜎5, 
taken as the 95% confidence interval. Here 𝜎5 is the root-mean-square residual of the fine-tuned 
regression for 𝑞 over the NASICON structures within the chemical system of that pair, so δ;<=2> 
differs from pair to pair. Accounting for this uncertainty gives: 
Δ𝑥'5"%,?3 = max 70, Δ𝑥'5"%67#() 9():'9 −2σ5
𝑅@A(B'
; 
Δ𝑥'5"%,?3 is zero when the refined value lies within δ;<=2> of the midpoint between the end 
members, and otherwise is the part of that distance lying beyond δ;<=2>, expressed as a fraction 
of 𝑅@A(B'. Values are reported as percentages (×100). 


 
 
3 
 
The calibration set is the thirteen equimolar two-cation phosphate pairs for which both single-
cation end members were also synthesized and refined in this work, so that 𝑞, and 𝑞- are measured 
rather than extrapolated. Four of these trials did not form their target phase, either because the 
target reflection is split or because the refined cell is incompatible with the equimolar phase. In 
NaSnHf(PO₄)₃, the (110) reflection splits into two components and the single-phase fit sits between 
them. The refined 𝑎 values of NaHfGe(PO₄)₃ and NaZrGe(PO₄)₃ fall within 0.016 and 0.021 Å of 
measured NaHf₂(PO₄)₃ and NaZr₂(PO₄)₃, respectively, on pairs spanning 0.664 and 0.708 Å, 
placing both at 𝑥(𝑞) ≥0.967 on 𝑎 and V; this is consistent with little or no germanium entering 
the structure, and GeO₂ was identified in NaZrGe(PO₄)₃. In Na₂ZrY(PO₄)₃, the distance from the 
equimolar target, Δ𝑥'5"%67#() 9():'9, is 0.08 for 𝑎 and 0.39 for V, compared with normalized model 
uncertainties of 0.01 and 0.05, respectively. In the remaining nine trials the target phase formed 
without showing any split reflections. 
Supplementary Figure 13 shows Δ𝑥'5"%,?3 for all thirteen pairs, on 𝑎 (circles) and V (diamonds), 
against the adopted 15% tolerance. Taking the larger of the two values for each pair, the largest 
among trials that formed their target phase is 11.5%, and the smallest among those that did not is 
18.2%. Any tolerance between these values separates the two groups, and the adopted 15% lies 
within this window. Supplementary Figures 14 and 15 show each pair for 𝑎 and V, respectively. 
Each panel plots the fine-tuned model across the pair, with δ;<=2> as the dark band and δ;<=2> 
plus 15% of the model-predicted end-member range as the light band. The measured end members 
are squares, the model value at the equimolar target is an open circle, and the refined value is a 
filled circle. The percentage on each panel is 𝑥(𝑞) × 100 measured from A, so an ideal equimolar 
product reads 50%. 
2. Multimodal NASICON composition analysis results 
All possible phases and confidences from AutoEMX are accessible in Supplementary Data. The 
refined XRD patterns are shown in Supplementary Figure 7-9. Cluster homogeneity in these 
synthetic samples, quantified by the root mean square of point-to-centroid distances (𝑑CDE)3 of the 
EDS compositional spectra (3.89<𝑑CDE<6.64 at%), is slightly worse than that of mineral standards 
(𝑑CDE<3 at%)3. Below are the phase compositions per target global composition: 
• Na3.4Hf0.8Zr0.8In0.3Ga0.1(SiO4)2(PO4) 


 
 
4 
 
o NASICON: Na3.30Hf0.71Zr0.97In0.22Ga0.10(SiO4)1.98(PO4)1.02 
o Impurities: 
§ HfZrO4 
§ Na2HfSi2O7 
§ Na2.22Hf0.71Zr0.94In0.34Ga0.01(SiO4)0.87(PO4)2.13  
• Na3.5Hf1.5In0.4Ga0.1(SiO4)2(PO4) 
o NASICON: Na3.46Hf1.74In0.19Ga0.07(SiO4)2.20(PO4)0.8 
o Impurities: 
§ Na2HfSi2O7 
§ HfO2 
§ Na3.23Hf0.59In1.33Ga0.08(SiO4)0.82(PO4)2.18 
• Na3.5Hf0.7In1.2Ge0.1(SiO4)1.3(PO4)1.7 
o NASICON: Na3.16Hf0.76In0.88Ge0.36(SiO4)1.29(PO4)1.71 
o Impurities: 
§ In2O3 
§ HfO2 
§ Na3.21In2(SiO4)0.21(PO4)2.79 
• Na4.3Hf0.3Zr1.3Zn0.4(SiO4)2.5(PO4)0.5 
o NASICON: Na3.57Hf0.33Zr1.67(SiO4)2.57(PO4)0.43 
o Impurities: 
§ HfZrO4 
§ Na2Zn(Si2O6) 
• Na3.5Hf0.9In1.0Ga0.1(SiO4)1.4(PO4)1.6 
o NASICON: Na3.27Hf0.95In0.86Ga0.19(SiO4)1.22(PO4)1.78 
o Impurities: 
§ In2O3 
§ HfO2 
§ Na3.33In2(SiO4)0.33(PO4)2.67 
• Na2.8Y0.7Hf0.9Ti0.4(SiO4)1.1(PO4)1.9 
o NASICON: Na2.87Y0.19Hf1.14Ti0.67(SiO4)1.68(PO4)1.32 
o Impurities 


 
 
5 
 
§ Na4Hf2(SiO4)3 
§ Na3.05Y1.60Hf0.28Ti0.12(SiO4)0.45(PO4)2.55 
 
3. Measurement of ionic conductivity and activation energies 
Ionic conductivities were determined via electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). The as-
synthesized powders were ball-milled (SPEX 8000M, 30 min), cold-pressed into 6 mm pellets 
under ~700 MPa, sintered at 1050-1100 °C for 1-2 hours (Supplementary Data), and fast-cooled, 
all under air atmosphere. Indium electrodes were applied via cold isostatic pressing at 30 MPa. 
EIS spectra were collected using a BioLogic VMP-300 potentiostat (7 MHz - 100 mHz, 10 mV 
amplitude). The EIS spectra were fitted using the impedance.py library4 with an equivalent circuit 
of series setup resistance (𝑅F), bulk (𝑅G||𝐶𝑃𝐸G), grain boundary (𝑅H||𝐶𝑃𝐸H), and diffusion element 
(𝐶𝑃𝐸I). Parameter initialization was automated via a valley search algorithm applied to Savitzky-
Golay smoothed data, followed by differential evolution optimization5. 
To determine activation energies (𝐸() for four of the six samples, temperature-dependent AC 
impedance spectroscopy was conducted at a subset of discrete intervals: -30, -10, 25, 35, 45, 55, 
65, 75, and 85 °C (Supplementary Figure 11). To preserve high-frequency signal integrity (~ 7 
MHz) within the thermal chamber during low-temperature measurements, the cell was 
mechanically isolated using a thick foam base to dampen vibrations, and physical contact between 
cabling and chamber walls was also minimized. The activation energy (𝐸() was derived by 
performing a linear regression of the data according to the linearized Arrhenius equation: 
ln(𝜎979(#𝑇) = 𝑚G1000
𝑇
I + 𝑐 
where 𝑚 is the slope, 𝑐 is the intercept, 𝜎979(# is the total ionic conductivity, and 𝑇 is temperature 
in Kelvin. The activation energy is then calculated as: 
𝐸( = −1000 ⋅ 𝑚⋅𝑘4 
where 𝑘4 is the Boltzmann constant. 
 
4. Ideal configurational entropy formulation and 𝑬𝒉𝒖𝒍𝒍,𝒊𝒅𝒆𝒂𝒍 
The rhombohedral NASICON unit cell contains five distinct crystallographic sites: Na (6b, 18e, 
36f), M (12c), and P/Si (18e). 


 
 
6 
 
 
Assuming a fully random configuration for each site, NASICONs with a sodium content of 𝑤≤4 
only occupy the 6b and 18e sites, whereas those with 𝑤> 4 access all three Na sites. This 
assumption provides an upper bound, as partial or full cation ordering typically decreases the true 
configurational entropy. Based on this framework, the ideal configurational entropy per atom 
(𝑠%&'(#,B7+*%:) is defined as: 
𝑠%&'(#,B7+*%: = −
𝑘4
𝑤+ 17 (𝑤𝑠̃Q( + 2𝑠̃D + 3𝑠̃3) 
 
𝑠̃Q( = U
𝑤
4 ln V𝑤
4W + V1 −𝑤
4W ln V1 −𝑤
4W ,
0 ≤𝑤≤4
𝑤
10 ln V 𝑤
10W + V1 −𝑤
10W ln V1 −𝑤
10W ,
𝑤> 4
 
 
𝑠̃D = X 𝑦%
2 ln V𝑦%
2W
%
 
 
𝑠̃3 = 𝑧
3 ln V𝑧
3W + V1 −𝑧
3W ln V1 −𝑧
3W 
 
Na (18e)
Na (36f)
Na (6b)
P/Si (18e) – Polyanion site
M (12c) – Metal cation site
NawM2(PO4)3-z(SiO4)z
Metal cation Polyanion


 
 
7 
 
where 𝑘4 is the Boltzmann constant, 𝑤 is the sodium content, 𝑦% is the stoichiometric content of 
metal cation 𝑖, and 𝑧 is the silicon content per normalized formula unit of NawM2(PO4)3-z(SiO4)z. 
 
Note that 𝑤 is used as the prefactor for 𝑠̃Q( (rather than the total site multiplicity of 4 or 10) to act 
as an empirical dampening factor. A fully random distribution across all Na sites is physically 
unlikely, as the sites fill sequentially (6b, then 18e, then 36f); substituting 𝑤 prevents artificial 
inflation of the sodium entropy contribution. To calculate the contribution of this entropy to the 
energy above the hull at temperature 𝑇, the augmented energy above the hull (𝐸!"##,%&'(#) is 
evaluated as: 
𝐸!"##,%&'(# = 𝐸!"## −𝑇𝑠%&'(#,B7+*%: 
 
where the 𝐸!"## of the NASICON phase is obtained from the Materials Project6,7. 
 
5. Empirical metastability limits of phosphate, silicate, and phosphosilicate NASICONs 
To compare the synthesis outcomes of the phosphates, silicates, and phosphosilicates with their 
thermodynamic stability, we mapped the phosphate, silicate, and phosphosilicate trials into the 
𝜋R!')67 feature space (Supplementary Figure 16). We overlaid the synthetic accessibility 
boundaries derived from the SVCs across four distinct 𝐸9!)'@!7#& limits: the thermodynamically 
stable limit (0 meV/atom), the empirical metastability limit for phosphates and silicates (15 
meV/atom), the practical metastability limit for phosphosilicates (41 meV/atom), and the absolute 
𝜋R!')67 accessibility limit for phosphosilicates (62.22 meV/atom). Synthesizable phosphates and 
silicates are completely encompassed within the 15 meV/atom boundary, whereas several 
successful phosphosilicates are not. Distinctively, most (and eventually all) phosphosilicates are 
captured within the synthetically accessible domains defined by the 41 meV/atom and 62.22 
meV/atom thresholds, respectively. While we did not establish a direct 𝐸!"##,%&'(# limit for 
phosphosilicates, these findings indicate that NASICONs with pure phosphate or pure silicate 
anion groups possess a distinct empirical metastability limit that is significantly lower than that of 
mixed phosphosilicate systems. 
 


 
 
8 
 
6. Precursor details 
Prior to use in the A-Lab, the Na2CO3 and NH4H2PO4 powders were each pre-processed separately 
in 10 g batches to achieve a finer particle size. This milling was performed in a polypropylene vial 
containing ten 5 mm ZrO2 balls using a Hauschild Smart DAC250 centrifugal mixer. 
Formula 
Purity 
Notes and product number 
Na2CO3 
≥99.5% 
Anhydrous, 222321 
HfO2 
98% 
202118 
ZrO2 
99% trace metals basis 
5 μm, 230693 
Ta2O5 
99% trace metals basis 
303518 
Sc2O3 
99.9% trace rare earth metals basis 
307874 
Nb2O5 
99.9% trace metals basis 
325 mesh, 208515 
MgO 
≥99% trace metals basis 
325 mesh, 342793 
TiO2 
99.8% trace metals basis 
Anatase, 232033 
In2O3 
99.99% trace metals basis 
289418 
SnO2 
99.9% trace metals basis 
325 mesh, 244651 
Y2O3 
99.99% trace metals basis 
205168 
Ga2O3 
≥ 99.99% trace metals basis 
215066 
Al2O3 
N/A 
Nanopowder <50 nm particle 
size (TEM), 544833 
ZnO 
N/A 
Nanopowder <50 nm particle 
size, 544906 
GeO2 
99.998% trace metals basis 
199478 
La2O3 
≥ 99.9% 
L4000 
NH4H2PO4 
≥ 98% 
216003 
SiO2 
99.5% trace metals basis 
325 mesh, 342890 
 
7. Support vector classifier (SVC) test set performance comparison (5-fold cross-validation) 
Classifier 
Average 
accuracy 
(%) 
Average 
recall 
(%) 
Average 
F1-score 
(%) 
Average training and test data amount 
(A = Synthetically Accessible,  
I = Synthetically Inaccessible) 
Before descriptor 
change 
82.08 
83.26 
74.70 
Training: 512 (A) and 2592 (I) 
Test: 129 (A) and 648 (I) 


 
 
9 
 
Classifier 
Average 
accuracy 
(%) 
Average 
recall 
(%) 
Average 
F1-score 
(%) 
Average training and test data amount 
(A = Synthetically Accessible,  
I = Synthetically Inaccessible) 
After descriptor 
change 
81.60 
82.22 
74.00 
Training: 512 (A) and 2592 (I) 
Test: 129 (A) and 648 (I) 
After descriptor and 
threshold changes 
87.25 
86.91 
84.78 
Training: 2259 (A) and 845 (I) 
Test: 565 (A) and 212 (I) 
 
8. Ionic conductivity cost-function components 
𝜋CS! = ^
0.70 −𝑅_D,
If 𝑅_D < 0.70 Å
𝑅_D −0.74,
Else If 𝑅_D > 0.74
0,
otherwise
 Å 
𝜋Q"# = e
2.5 −𝑁Q(,
If 𝑁Q( < 2.5
𝑁Q( −3.5,
Else If 𝑁Q( > 3.5
0,
otherwise
 
𝜋CS$ = ^
0.215 −𝑅_3,
If 𝑅_3 < 0.215 Å
𝑅_3 −0.245,
Else If 𝑅_3 > 0.245 Å
0,
otherwise
 
 
9. Vegard’s approximation training and 𝝅𝑳𝑷 details  
To link composition to structural metrics, we constructed two multiple linear regression models8 
rooted in Vegard’s approximation2,9–11. The training dataset comprised 102 literature-reported 
structures from ICSD and 11 in-house synthesized single-cation NASICONs; to ensure 
consistency, we exclusively selected data collected at ambient pressure and near room temperature 
(250 K < T < 305 K). Using the average polyanion center ion radius (𝑅h3), cation radius (𝑅hD), and 
sodium content (𝑁Q() as predictors, these models independently estimate the 𝑎-lattice parameter 
and unit cell volume (𝑉), from which the 𝑐-lattice parameter is geometrically derived. While the 
global models yield high predictive accuracy (𝑅H values of 0.93 and 0.89 for 𝑎 and 𝑉, respectively; 
Supplementary Figure 17a-b), precise decision-making within specific sub-systems requires 
minimized local error. To achieve this, we implemented an adaptive fine-tuning strategy for each 
chemical space: during the fitting process, compositions within the target chemical space are 
assigned a weight of 10,000. This forces the regressor to prioritize local data fidelity while still 
leveraging global trends to constrain predictions in sparse regions. An example for NASICONs in 
the Na-Mn-V-Ti-P-O chemical space is shown in Supplementary Figure 17c-d, where the 
general Vegard’s approximation model yields a significantly higher mean absolute error (MAE) 


 
 
10 
 
and a lower R2 value compared to the fine-tuned model. Finally, the lattice parameters feedback 
cost function (𝜋VW) is defined as the mean percentage difference between the model-predicted 
values for a candidate composition (Υ) and the experimentally refined values obtained from a prior 
synthesis trial: 
𝜋VW = 1
3 7
|𝑎XCY −𝑎Z|
𝑎XCY
+
|𝑐XCY −𝑐Z|
𝑐XCY
+
|𝑉XCY −𝑉Z|
𝑉XCY
; × 100% 
where 𝑎XCY, 𝑐XCY, and 𝑉XCY are the unit cell 𝑎 and 𝑐 lattice parameters and volume, respectively, 
obtained from the experimentally refined values. The variables with the Υ subscript denote the 
corresponding structural values predicted by the regressors. An example using the as-synthesized 
Na2TiSc(PO4)3 NASICON is shown in Supplementary Figure 17e, where the minimum of 𝜋VW 
accurately corresponds to Na2TiSc(PO4)3 composition. This demonstrates that the experimentally 
refined lattice parameters and volume of the synthesized material closely match those predicted 
by the linear regressors, confirming the self-consistency of the predictive model against the 
experimental result. 
 
10. Calibration for high purity and major NASICON samples 
To mitigate the influence of automated refinement artifacts on the purity assessment, we calibrated 
the Purity Score such that a value of 1.0 corresponds to samples with negligible impurity content. 
We assembled a calibration dataset of 20 high-purity samples (Supplementary Data), with 
representative refined diffractograms shown in Supplementary Figure 18a-c. Since the raw 
Estimated Purity (EP) is sensitive to fit quality, suboptimal automated refinement can result in 
artificially low scores. This is exemplified in Supplementary Figure 18c, where automated 
refinement yielded a low EP due to poor fit (Rwp=14.52%). In contrast, manual refinement of the 
same pattern (Supplementary Figure 18e) achieved a significantly better fit (Rwp=6.78%), 
confirming the sample's actual high purity and necessitating this calibration.  
To establish the threshold defining a "major" NASICON phase, we performed a sensitivity 
analysis by incrementally increasing the Purity Score threshold in steps of 0.1. The criterion for a 
major phase was defined as the NASICON maximum peak intensity exceeding that of any 
unidentified secondary peaks. Representative diffractograms for samples meeting this criterion are 
shown in Supplementary Figure 19a-c, while a sample falling below it is shown in 
Supplementary Figure 19d. This comparison determined that a Purity Score threshold of 0.7 


 
 
11 
 
conservatively distinguishes samples with a predominant NASICON phase from those dominated 
by impurities. 
 
11. Multimodal NASICON composition analysis 
To resolve the composition of the synthesized NASICON phase, we employed a multimodal 
approach integrating thermodynamic and lattice-parameter-based screening with automated SEM-
EDS characterization. The analysis followed a three-step workflow: (1) Automated SEM-EDS 
data acquisition, filtering, and k-means clustering; (2) Hybrid optimization for composition 
assignment; and (3) Final phase identification. The specific details of each step are outlined below: 
1. Automated SEM-EDS data acquisition, filtering, and k-means clustering: 
Compositional measurement was performed using the AutoEMX framework3 on a Thermo 
Fisher Phenom XL G2 desktop SEM equipped with an Ametek FAST SDD (controlled via 
the PyPhenom Python API). Powder samples were dispersed onto carbon tape on 
aluminum stubs, and for each sample, 200 individual 50,000-count EDS spot spectra were 
autonomously acquired at 15 kV on randomly selected particles. Following the automated 
acquisition, principled filtering of unreliable spectra and k-means clustering were 
performed to identify and extract the compositions of the individual constituent phases in 
each sample, as established in prior work3. 
2. Hybrid optimization for composition assignment: Each resulting cluster possesses a 
centroid representing the mean of its compositional distribution. To identify the best-fitting 
NASICON composition for each cluster, we employed a hybrid optimization scheme. To 
ensure an exhaustive evaluation, we utilized the composition-to-structure relationships 
derived from Vegard’s approximation (see Methods and Supplementary Information 9). 
This, alongside the uncertainty-aware verification described in the XRD phase analysis 
(see Methods), constrained the viable NASICON candidates to those matching the 
observed lattice parameters. We performed a global search to identify 100 distinct 
compositions satisfying this constraint. Simultaneously, a fine-grid search was conducted 
around the nominal target composition, generating an additional 5,000 proximate 
candidates. These candidates were screened using the thermodynamic cost function 
(𝜋R!')67) to eliminate synthetically inaccessible phases, yielding a final pool of 67-92 
globally diverse and 3,974-5,000 local candidate compositions per sample. Initialized with 


 
 
12 
 
these globally diverse candidates and a subset of the local candidates (totaling 250 points), 
the algorithm executed differential evolution followed by gradient-based BFGS 
optimization. The objective function minimized a composite cost comprising 𝜋R!')67, the 
Euclidean compositional distance to the cluster centroid, and a lattice parameter penalty 
restricting candidates to within the intrinsic uncertainty of Vegard’s approximation plus 
15% of the chemical system's total parameter or volume range. By incorporating these 
constraints, this hybrid optimization resolves an optimal solution that accounts for the 
inherent experimental uncertainties of both XRD and SEM-EDS techniques. 
3. Final phase identification: To rigorously determine which candidate compositions best 
match each measured cluster, the best-fitting NASICON compositions for each cluster, 
together with impurity phases identified from XRD pattern refinement, were fed as 
candidate phases into the AutoEMX clustering analysis routine. This routine systematically 
evaluates whether clusters stem from single-phase or two-phase mixtures of candidate 
phases to accurately resolve the constituent phases for each cluster. The compositions and 
phase combinations with the highest statistical confidence were ultimately selected and 
reported. 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
13 
 
12. Supplementary Figures 1-19 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 1. Threshold adjustment to resolve classification discrepancies and 
define 𝝅𝑻𝒉𝒆𝒓𝒎𝒐. Mapping of 524 experimentally verified, literature-mined NASICON 
compositions (dark blue dots) into the reduced thermodynamic feature space. The background 
shading delineates the support vector classifier (SVC) prediction regions: synthetically accessible 
(A, light region) and synthetically inaccessible (I, dark gray region).  (a) The SVC decision 
boundary trained using the original strict stability threshold of 𝐸!"##,%&'(# = 0 meV/atom. Under 
this stringent threshold, a significant number of known, experimentally verified compositions are 
incorrectly classified as inaccessible, as highlighted by the red box. The black arrow between the 
panels represents the threshold relaxation process. (b) The updated SVC decision boundary trained 
using an adjusted stability threshold of 𝐸!"##,%&'(# ≤62.22 meV/atom. The blue arrows in both 
panels illustrate the resulting rightward shift of the decision boundary. This shifted boundary 
represents the minimum threshold required to correctly encompass all 524 verified compositions 
within the accessible (A) region, effectively resolving the prior discrepancy. The axes represent 
combinations of the four retained stability descriptors: the electronegativity difference between Na 
and the cations (𝑋D
Q(), cation radius deviation (𝑅D
ERY), sodium content (𝑁Q(), and anion charge 
deviation (𝑄3
ERY). 


 
 
14 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 2. Validation of synthetic accessibility cost functions (Zr-Sn-Ti-Ge 
phosphate). Diffractograms from Rietveld refinements of XRD patterns comparing the initial 
synthesis trial (top) and the subsequent CASS-designed trial (bottom) for the Zr-Sn-Ti-Ge 
pseudoquaternary phosphate system. 
NaZr0.5Sn0.5Ti0.5Ge0.5(PO4)3
NaZr0.64Sn0.81Ti0.36Ge0.19(PO4)3
Single iteration
𝑅𝑤𝑝= 6.51%
𝑅𝑤𝑝= 7.31%


 
 
15 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 3. Validation of synthetic accessibility cost functions (Zr-Sn-Ti-Ge 
silicate). Comparison of Rietveld-refined XRD patterns for an initial synthesis trial (top) and a 
subsequent CASS-designed trial (bottom). The initial trial resulted in a phase with lattice 
parameters deviating significantly from theoretical predictions for the target composition, 
indicating a failure to form the desired solid solution. In contrast, the CASS-designed trial yielded 
lattice parameters closely matching expected values of the new design, demonstrating the system's 
ability to successfully navigate toward synthetically accessible regions of the design space. 
Na4Zr0.5Sn0.5Ti0.5Ge0.5(SiO4)3
Na4Zr0.99Sn0.79Ti0.09Ge0.13(SiO4)3
Single iteration
Lattice parameters are too far from the 
expectation
𝑅𝑤𝑝= 5.55%
Lattice parameters are close 
to expectation
𝑅𝑤𝑝= 6.15%


 
 
16 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 4. Validation of synthetic accessibility cost functions (Zr-Sn-Ge 
phosphate). Diffractograms from Rietveld refinements of XRD patterns comparing the initial 
synthesis trial (top) and the subsequent CASS-designed trials (middle, bottom) for the Zr-Sn-Ge 
pseudoternary phosphate system. “NUFO” label indicates that the impurity was not used for 
optimization since it was later added manually and was not detected within the automated phase 
search during the CASS loop. 
NaZr0.85Sn0.72Ge0.43(PO4)3 (𝑅𝑤𝑝= 5.70%)
NaZr1.42Sn0.43Ge0.15(PO4)3 (𝑅𝑤𝑝= 6.86%)
NaZr1.74Sn0.13Ge0.13(PO4)3 (𝑅𝑤𝑝= 5.47%)
Single iteration
Single iteration


 
 
17 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 5. Validation of synthetic accessibility cost functions (Zr-Nb-Ge 
phosphate). Diffractograms from Rietveld refinements of XRD patterns comparing the initial 
synthesis trial (top) and the subsequent CASS-designed trials (middle, bottom) for the Zr-Nb-Ge 
pseudoternary phosphate system. “NUFO” label indicates that the impurity was not used for 
optimization since it was later added manually and was not detected within the automated phase 
search during the CASS loop. 
Na0.33Zr0.14Nb0.67Ge1.19(PO4)3 (𝑅𝑤𝑝= 10.30%)
Single iteration
Na0.29Zr0.16Nb0.71Ge1.12(PO4)3 (𝑅𝑤𝑝= 9.79%)
Na0.12Zr0.12Nb0.88Ge(PO4)3 (𝑅𝑤𝑝= 9.41%)
Single iteration


 
 
18 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 6. Validation of synthetic accessibility cost functions (Zr-Ti-Ge 
phosphate). Diffractograms from Rietveld refinements of XRD patterns comparing the initial 
synthesis trial (top) and the subsequent CASS-designed trials (second, third, bottom) for the Zr-
Ti-Ge pseudoternary phosphate system. “NUFO” label indicates that the impurity was not used for 
optimization since it was later added manually and was not detected within the automated phase 
search during the CASS loop. 
NaZr0.29Ti0.64Ge1.07(PO4)3(𝑅𝑤𝑝= 11.06%)
NaZr0.26Ti0.52Ge1.22(PO4)3(𝑅𝑤𝑝= 12.16%)
Single iteration
NaZr0.16Ti0.63Ge1.21(PO4)3(𝑅𝑤𝑝= 10.38%)
Single iteration
NaZr0.13Ti0.74Ge1.13(PO4)3(𝑅𝑤𝑝= 10.12%)
Single iteration


 
 
19 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 7. Diffractograms from Rietveld refinements of XRD patterns for the 
respective 
as-synthesized 
promising 
NASICON 
ionic 
conductors. 
(a) 
Na3.4Hf0.8Zr0.8In0.3Ga0.1(SiO4)2(PO4) and (b) Na3.5Hf1.5In0.4Ga0.1(SiO4)2(PO4), displaying observed 
(blue), calculated (green), background (red), and difference (cyan) profiles alongside weighted 
profile R-factors (𝑅_A). 
(a) Na3.4Hf0.8Zr0.8In0.3Ga0.1(SiO4)2(PO4) (𝑅𝑤𝑝= 6.43%)
(b) Na3.5Hf1.5In0.4Ga0.1(SiO4)2(PO4) (𝑅𝑤𝑝= 6.64%)


 
 
20 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 8. Diffractograms from Rietveld refinements of XRD patterns for the 
respective as-synthesized less ionically conducting samples. The observed (blue crosses), 
calculated (green line), background (red line), and difference (cyan line) profiles are shown. The 
weighted 
profile 
R-factors 
(𝑹𝒘𝒑) 
are 
indicated 
for 
each 
refinement. 
(a) 
Na3.5Hf0.7In1.2Ge0.1(SiO4)1.3(PO4)1.7 and (b) Na4.3Hf0.3Zr1.3Zn0.4(SiO4)2.5(PO4)0.5. 
Na4.3Hf0.3Zr1.3Zn0.4(SiO4)2.5(PO4)0.5 (𝑅𝑤𝑝= 8.41%)
(b)
Na3.5Hf0.7In1.2Ge0.1(SiO4)1.3(PO4)1.7 (𝑅𝑤𝑝= 7.60%)
(a)
Intensity (a.u.)
Intensity (a.u.)


 
 
21 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 9. Diffractograms from Rietveld refinements of XRD patterns for the 
respective as-synthesized less ionically conducting samples (cont.). The observed (blue 
crosses), calculated (green line), background (red line), and difference (cyan line) profiles are 
shown. The weighted profile R-factors (𝐑𝐰𝐩) are indicated for each refinement. (a) 
Na3.5Hf0.9In1.0Ga0.1(SiO4)1.4(PO4)1.6 and (b) Na2.8Y0.7Hf0.9Ti0.4(SiO4)1.1(PO4)1.9. 
 
Na3.5Hf0.9In1.0Ga0.1(SiO4)1.4(PO4)1.6 (𝑅𝑤𝑝= 6.53%)
(a)
Na2.8Y0.7Hf0.9Ti0.4(SiO4)1.1(PO4)1.9 (𝑅𝑤𝑝= 5.53%)
(b)
Intensity (a.u.)
Intensity (a.u.)


 
 
22 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 10. Post-processing result of Na3.5Hf1.5In0.4Ga0.1(SiO4)2(PO4). 
Diffractograms from Rietveld refinements of XRD patterns comparing the as-synthesized sample 
(top) and the subsequent post-processed sample (bottom). 
 
Na3.5Hf1.5In0.4Ga0.1(SiO4)2(PO4) before  (𝑅𝑤𝑝= 6.64%)
Grind, cold press, sinter, quench
After (𝑅𝑤𝑝= 6.78%)


 
 
23 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 11. Temperature-dependent ionic conductivity profiles. Arrhenius 
plots displaying the total ionic conductivity (𝜎979(#), alongside resolvable bulk (𝜎d"#e) and grain 
boundary 
(𝜎:d) 
components, 
for: 
(a) 
Na3.4Hf0.8Zr0.8In0.3Ga0.1(SiO4)2(PO4), 
(b) 
Na3.5Hf1.5In0.4Ga0.1(SiO4)2(PO4), 
(c) 
Na3.5Hf0.9In1.0Ga0.1(SiO4)1.4(PO4)1.6, 
and 
(d) 
Na2.8Y0.7Hf0.9Ti0.4(SiO4)1.1(PO4)1.9. 
 
(a)
(b)
(d)
(c)


 
 
24 
 
 
(a)
(b)


 
 
25 
 
Supplementary Figure 12. Practical and empirical metastability limits at T = 1000 K and T 
= 1373 K. (a) Success rate of forming a major-phase NASICON versus the initial stability 
threshold (𝐸*%)@9 @9(d#' 9!)'@!7#&) calculated at T = 1373 K. The dashed vertical line denotes the 
practical metastability limit at 41 meV/atom, which remains consistent across both 1000 K and 
1373 K evaluations. Numbers above the bars indicate the sample count within each bin, and error 
bars represent the standard error. (b) DFT-calculated energy above the hull augmented with ideal 
configurational entropy (𝐸!"##,%&'(#) evaluated at the synthesis temperature of T = 1373 K for 
various phosphate (circles) and silicate (triangles) NASICON compositions. Synthesizable 
compositions (blue and cyan markers) are separated from failed syntheses (red markers) by an 
empirical metastability limit. The horizontal dashed lines highlight the temperature-dependent 
shift of this empirical limit: from 15 meV/atom at T = 1000 K (black dashed line) down to 9.5 
meV/atom at T = 1373 K (blue dashed line). 
 


 
 
26 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 13. Distance of each product from its equimolar target, beyond the model 
uncertainty, Δ𝑥'5"%,?3, for the thirteen pseudobinary phosphate pairs. Each product is located on 
its pair by the refined a (circles) and unit-cell volume (V, diamonds), between the measured end 
members. Blue, target phase formed; red, not formed. Dashed line, the adopted tolerance of 15%. 
Products that formed reach at most 11.5% on both quantities; those that did not form reach at least 
18.2% on at least one. NaSnHf(PO₄)₃ exceeds on a only and Na₂ZrY(PO₄)₃ on V only. 
 


 
 
27 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 14. Pseudobinary sections in the 𝑎 lattice parameter for the thirteen 
phosphate pairs. Solid line, fine-tuned model; dark band, δ;<=2>; light band, δ;<=2> plus 15% of 
the model-predicted end-member range; squares with dotted levels, measured end members; open 
circle, model value at the equimolar target; filled circle, refined value, blue where the target phase 
formed and red where it did not. Percentages are 𝑥(𝑞) × 100 measured from the left, so an ideal 
equimolar product reads 50%. NaGeHf(PO₄)₃ and NaGeZr(PO₄)₃ read 98% and 97%, placing them 
at the Hf and Zr end members. NaSnHf(PO₄)₃ is marked for its split (110) reflection. 


 
 
28 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 15. As Supplementary Figure 14, for the unit-cell volume V. 
Na₂ZrSc(PO₄)₃ reads -5%, its refined volume falling just outside the end-member interval; that pair 
spans only 9.5 Å³ against δ;<=2>= 4.6 Å³, so 𝑥(𝑉) is poorly resolved there. 
 


 
 
29 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 16. Stability boundaries in the machine-learned feature space for 
NASICONs. Distribution of phosphate (circles), silicate (triangles), and phosphosilicate (squares) 
compositions within the machine-learned stability feature space, defined by descriptors. All 
compositions are categorized by synthesis success: phosphates and silicates are differentiated by 
successful (blue/cyan) versus failed (red) syntheses, while phosphosilicates are distinguished by 
forming a major (green) or minor/no (red) NASICON phase. The plot illustrates four distinct linear 
decision boundaries corresponding to different energy thresholds (𝐸9!)'@!7#& = 0, 15, 41, and 62.22 
meV/atom), which divide the feature space into synthetically accessible (A) and inaccessible (I) 
domains. 


 
 
30 
 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 17. Validation of Vegard’s approximation models and 𝝅𝑳𝑷. Multiple 
linear regression fits over all structures (ICSD and single-cation phosphate NASICON syntheses) 
for predicting the unit cell (a) 𝑎 lattice parameter and (b) volume. The R2 and mean absolute error 
(MAE) of each regressor are shown at the top of each plot. Comparison between the fine-tuned 
and general regressors for NASICON in the Na-Mn-V-Ti-P-O chemical space for (c) 𝑎 lattice 


 
 
31 
 
parameter and (d) volume predictions. The blue (black) dots represent predictions from the fine-
tuned (general) regressors, while the red line shows the ideal condition where predicted and true 
values are equal. (e) Visualization of 𝜋VW for composition variation in Na1+xTi2-xScx(PO4)3 
evaluated against the experimental volume and lattice parameters of as-synthesized 
Na2TiSc(PO4)3. Each dot represents one generated composition. 
 


 
 
32 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 18. Validation of high-purity samples via X-ray diffraction for Purity 
Score upper threshold determination. (a-c) Representative diffractograms and weighted profile 
R-factors (𝑅_A) obtained from the automated Rietveld refinement of samples with no impurity 
peaks. (d) Distribution of Estimated Purity (EP) percentages across the high-purity sample set from 
the automated refinements; the red dashed line indicates the average EP (78.33%). (e) Manual 
Rietveld refinement of the sample shown in panel c (Na3.5Hf1.5In0.4Ga0.1(SiO4)2(PO4)). This sample 
yielded the lowest EP in the automated analysis; the significant improvement in fit quality between 
the automated (c, 𝑅_A = 14.52%) and manual (e, 𝑅_A = 6.78%) refinements highlights the 
limitations of the automated routine in resolving complex peak profiles. In all plots, experimental 
data (blue dots in a-c, blue crosses in e), calculated profiles (green lines), background (red lines), 
and difference (cyan lines) are shown. 
Na3.5Hf1.5In0.4Ga0.1(SiO4)2(PO4) Manual reﬁnement (Rwp=6.78%)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Na3.5Hf1.5In0.4Ga0.1(SiO4)2(PO4) (Rwp=14.52%)
Na3ZrMg(PO4)3 (Rwp=6.59%)
NaSn2(PO4)3 (Rwp=10.41%)
Intensity (a.u.)
Intensity (a.u.)
Intensity (a.u.)


 
 
33 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 19. Validation of Purity Score threshold via X-ray diffraction. 
Representative diffractograms obtained from automated Rietveld refinement used to calibrate the 
Purity Score threshold. Panels (a–c) display samples identified as having a major NASICON 
phase, characterized by high Purity Scores (>0.7). Panel (d) shows a sample 
(Na3.5Zr0.6Ti0.2In0.5Sn0.7(SiO4)2(PO4)) where the NASICON phase is only a minor phase, resulting 
in a low Purity Score of 0.53. In all plots, experimental data (blue dots), calculated profiles (green 
lines), background (red lines), and difference curves (light-blue lines) and NASICON reflection 
positions (red ticks) are shown. 
 
 
Purity score = 0.82
Purity score = 0.53
Purity score = 0.81
Purity score = 0.77
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Purity score = 0.53
Intensity (a.u.)
Intensity (a.u.)
Intensity (a.u.)
Intensity (a.u.)


 
 
34 
 
References 
1. Narayanan, S., Reid, S., Butler, S. & Thangadurai, V. Sintering temperature, excess sodium, 
and phosphorous dependencies on morphology and ionic conductivity of NASICON 
Na3Zr2Si2PO12. Solid State Ionics 331, 22–29 (2019). 
2. Denton, A. R. & Ashcroft, N. W. Vegard’s law. Phys. Rev. A 43, 3161–3164 (1991). 
3. Giunto, A. et al. Accurate SEM-EDS quantification, automation, and machine learning 
enable high-throughput compositional characterization of powders. Nat Commun 17, 9735 
(2026). 
4. Murbach, M., Gerwe, B., Dawson-Elli, N. & Tsui, L. impedance.py: A Python package for 
electrochemical impedance analysis. JOSS 5, 2349 (2020). 
5. Virtanen, P. et al. SciPy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientific computing in Python. Nat 
Methods 17, 261–272 (2020). 
6. Horton, M. K. et al. Accelerated data-driven materials science with the Materials Project. 
Nat. Mater. 24, 1522–1532 (2025). 
7. Jain, A. et al. Commentary: The Materials Project: A materials genome approach to 
accelerating materials innovation. APL Materials 1, 011002 (2013). 
8. Pedregosa, F. et al. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning 
Research 12, 2825–2830 (2011). 
9. Rusdi, H. et al. The Role of Sintering Temperature and Dual Metal Substitutions (Al3+, 
Ti4+) in the Development of NASICON-Structured Electrolyte. Materials 14, 7342 (2021). 
10. Zhang, H., Su, Y., Zhang, J., Ni, Z. & Zhang, X. Controllable structural ordering via 
chemical substitution to the efficient and thermally stable luminescence in NASICON-type 
phosphor Series: Na1+Hf2−Sc (PO4)3:Eu. Chemical Engineering Journal 426, 130778 
(2021). 


 
 
35 
 
11. Asabina, E., Sedov, V., Pet’kov, V., Deyneko, D. & Kovalsky, A. Synthesis, structure and 
luminescence properties of the europium–containing NASICON type phosphates. J Sol-Gel 
Sci Technol 105, 547–554 (2023). 
 
