Title: From sparse quantum-computing data to atomistic simulation with universal machine-learning interatomic potentials

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.21536v1

Published Time: Mon, 21 Sep 2026 00:49:20 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# From sparse quantum-computing data to atomistic simulation with universal machine-learning interatomic potentials 

Tuan Minh Do, 1, ∗ Yuichiro Yoshida, 1 Kenji Ishihara, 1 and Wataru Mizukami 1, 2, † 

> 1

Center for Quantum Information and Quantum Biology, The University of Osaka, 1-2 Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-8531, Japan. 

> 2

Graduate School of Engineering Science, The University of Osaka, 1-3 Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-8531, Japan. 

(Dated: September 21, 2026) We propose a framework for incorporating quantum-computing-based electronic-structure calculations into universal machine-learning interatomic potentials (uMLIPs). Rather than constructing an interatomic potential from scratch, we refine a pretrained DFT-based uMLIP using a small set of accurate reference energies ob-tained from quantum computing. We demonstrate the approach for three chemically distinct applications: the Menshutkin reaction, water adsorption in the metal-organic framework HKUST-1, and CO hopping on a high-entropy-alloy nanoparticle. For the Menshutkin reaction, fine-tuning on gas-phase configurations improves the transition-state energy inside a carbon nanotube but not the product energy. For water adsorption in HKUST-1, fine-tuning with only 14 reference configurations brings adsorption thermodynamics obtained from millions of configurations sampled by Widom insertion into closer agreement with reference values. For CO hopping on an IrPdPtRhRu nanoparticle, the preference for on-top over bridge adsorption is recovered in the finite-temperature free-energy profile obtained from enhanced-sampling molecular dynamics, even though the reference data con-tain only energies. These results demonstrate that the proposed framework provides a practical route for in-corporating quantum-computing calculations into realistic atomistic simulations and that quantum-computing reference data can improve pretrained uMLIPs. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Quantum computing has advanced rapidly in recent years, and for some quantum many-body problems it is entering regimes where classical verification is becoming increasingly difficult [1–4]. One of the most promising applications of quantum computing is quantum chemistry [5, 6]. The ap-plication of quantum computing to electronic-structure calcu-lations has developed substantially over the last decade. It has been estimated that, once fault-tolerant quantum comput-ers (FTQC) become available, the ground-state energy of the FeMo cofactor, a widely known system with a highly complex electronic structure, could be computed in less than a day [7]. As an intermediate step toward FTQC, researchers have also actively developed hybrid quantum–classical algorithms [8– 10]. In particular, the emergence of sampling-based algo-rithms, represented by quantum-selected configuration inter-action (QSCI) [11], is beginning to enable practical quantum-chemistry calculations beyond toy-model systems [12–16]. However, quantum-computing calculations cannot yet pro-vide the computational throughput required in modern com-putational chemistry. Importantly, this limitation will not dis-appear simply with the advent of FTQCs. Rather, an FTQC necessarily involves substantial overhead from quantum er-ror correction [17], and performing a single-point electronic-structure calculation can therefore remain time-consuming. At the same time, connecting electronic-structure accuracy to experimentally relevant finite-temperature properties requires accounting for contributions from many thermally accessible   

> ∗do.tuan.minh.qiqb@osaka-u.ac.jp
> †mizukami.wataru.qiqb@osaka-u.ac.jp

configurations. Atomistic simulation methods such as molec-ular dynamics provide a direct route to sampling these con-figurations but can require millions to billions of energy and force evaluations. This scale difference is reflected in re-cent studies that have explored directly combining quantum-computing-based electronic-structure methods with molecular dynamics [18, 19]. A recently reported molecular-dynamics trajectory using quantum hardware was 250 fs, corresponding to 500 time steps, which is far shorter than the trajectories typically required for extensive finite-temperature sampling. The most direct approach to bridging this gap is to use electronic-structure calculations to construct an inexpensive potential energy surface (PES) model through machine learn-ing. Such models are now commonly referred to as machine-learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs) [20–24], although the broader idea of constructing an inexpensive surrogate PES from expensive quantum-mechanical calculations has a much longer history, extending back to the early days of quantum mechanics. It is therefore natural to use expensive quantum-computing results to make an MLIP. Indeed, several studies have explored MLIPs trained on electronic-structure data ob-tained from quantum computers. However, so far, demonstra-tions have been restricted to systems with only a few atoms and to proof-of-concept simulations. Moreover, all these stud-ies used the variational quantum eigensolver (VQE) [8, 25] with small basis sets. Consequently, the resulting electronic-structure data were not only strongly affected by hardware noise but also lacked a substantial part of the dynamic elec-tron correlation, resulting in not improving MLIPs. It there-fore remains unclear whether combining quantum computing and MLIPs can provide a practical route to realistic atom-istic simulation. Furthermore, previous studies have focused on constructing system-specific MLIPs from scratch. To our knowledge, the use of quantum-computing data to refine the arXiv:2609.21536v1 [physics.chem-ph] 18 Sep 2026 2recently emerging class of universal MLIPs (uMLIPs) has not yet been explored [26–30]. Here, we show that high-fidelity information from a limited number of quantum-computing-based electronic-structure calculations can be transferred to accurate downstream atom-istic simulations through fine-tuning of pretrained uMLIPs. We demonstrate this across three chemically distinct appli-cations using QSCI-based reference data [31]. The gas-phase energy profile for the Menshutkin reaction transfers to carbon-nanotube confinement and improves the predicted reaction barrier. A static water-adsorption profile in HKUST-1 im-proves finite-temperature adsorption thermodynamics. Fi-nally, a static CO-hopping profile on an IrPdPtRhRu nanopar-ticle recovers the expected on-top site preference in the finite-temperature free-energy profile. Our results show that the scarcity of quantum-computing reference calculations does not prevent their practical use in atomistic simulation. From a machine-learning perspective, they further suggest that quantum computers could provide a valuable source of high-fidelity training data for improving the capabilities of uMLIPs.   

> II. METHODS A. Computational workflow

An overview of the computational workflow is shown in Fig. 1. High-fidelity energies are obtained from quantum-computing-based electronic-structure calculations. Due to the high computational cost, only a small number of configura-tions can be evaluated in practice, for example as discrete points along a potential-energy curve. The aim is to enable atomistic simulations to benefit from this level of accuracy despite the sparsity of the available high-fidelity information. To achieve this, we fine-tune a pretrained uMLIP using the available data from the quantum-computing-based calcu-lations. The pretrained uMLIP provides an approximate de-scription of the potential-energy surface over a sufficiently broad region of configurational space to support stable atom-istic simulations. We exploit this information to interpolate between and extend beyond the configurations treated at the quantum-computing level, yielding an approximation to the corresponding potential-energy surface. The resulting fine-tuned uMLIP can be evaluated efficiently throughout the extensive configurational sampling required for subsequent atomistic simulations. The generated ensem-bles capture structural fluctuations at finite temperature and provide the statistical information needed to determine the rel-ative populations of accessible configurations. In this way, the workflow enables high-fidelity electronic-structure infor-mation from quantum computing to be transferred to finite-temperature atomistic simulations.  

> B. Quantum-computing reference data

The molecular structures and reference electronic ener-gies used in this work were taken from our previous study [31]. The calculations in that study were based on aquantum–classical electronic-structure framework combin-ing quantum-selected configuration interaction (QSCI) [11], projection-based wave-function-in-density-functional-theory (WF-in-DFT) embedding [32], and classical post-processing. Projection-based WF-in-DFT embedding partitions the full system into a wave-function subsystem and a surrounding environment described at the DFT level. Within the wave-function subsystem, QSCI provides an active-space wave function that is subsequently used in classical post-processing to recover electron correlation beyond the active space. Tailored coupled-cluster theory with singles, doubles, and perturbative triples (TCCSD(T)) was used as the classical post-processing method for the reference energies considered here [14]. QSCI-TCCSD(T) was combined with WF-in-DFT embedding for water adsorption on the HKUST-1 MOF and CO hopping between bridge and on-top sites on the IrPdP-tRhRu HEA nanoparticle. The gas-phase Menshutkin S N2reaction was treated without embedding. The QSCI calcula-tions employed active spaces of (4e,4o), (2e,2o), and (4e,4o) for the Menshutkin, HKUST-1, and HEA systems, respec-tively, where the notation indicates the numbers of active elec-trons (e) and orbitals (o). To obtain the determinants spanning the QSCI subspace, sampling in the computational basis was performed on the 144-physical-qubit superconducting quan-tum computer at the University of Osaka. Only the subset of qubits required by the corresponding active-space mapping was used, with a shot budget of 10,000 for each calculation. The corresponding reference data contained 3, 14, and 9 con-figurations, respectively. The reference structures were used without further geometry optimization.  

> C. MLIP fine-tuning

Among the available MLIP architectures, we chose MACE [33], which combines equivariant message passing with many-body representations based on the atomic cluster ex-pansion (ACE) [34]. Incorporating equivariance and ex-plicit many-body representations can improve data efficiency [33, 35]. This matters here because only a small number of reference configurations is available. MACE-Osaka24 Large [29], a MACE foundation model trained on both molecular and inorganic crystal datasets, was used as the pretrained uM-LIP for all calculations. The reference data for the Men-shutkin, HKUST-1, and HEA systems were combined into a single dataset and used to fine-tune one model using the multihead replay approach implemented in MACE [36]. In multihead replay, the target data and a replay dataset drawn from the original pretraining data are assigned separate out-put heads while sharing the underlying model representation. This helps preserve information already learned by the pre-trained uMLIP and limits its loss during fine-tuning, com-monly known as catastrophic forgetting. For the subsequent 3       

> FIG. 1. Computational workflow for transferring quantum-computing reference energies to finite-temperature atomistic simulations. a, Quantum–classical electronic-structure calculations provide reference energies (blue points) for a small number of configurations along a reaction coordinate ξ.b, These reference energies are used to fine-tune a pretrained universal machine-learning interatomic potential (uMLIP). The energy profile along ξ(black line) illustrates how the potential-energy surface (PES) changes after fine-tuning around the reference configurations. c, The fine-tuned uMLIP is subsequently used to sample an ensemble of configurations (gray points) at finite temperature. The resulting ensemble is used to calculate finite-temperature observables.

atomistic simulations, only the target head was used. All available reference configurations were used for fine-tuning, with no subset held out for validation or testing. The reference data were therefore used for both training and val-idation of the target head. Instead of evaluating performance on a held-out subset of the reference data, the fine-tuned model was assessed using the subsequent atomistic simula-tions. No configurations from these simulations were included in the reference data. For each system, the relative energies from the quantum-computing-based calculations were shifted by a constant off-set such that the minimum-energy reference configuration was aligned with the corresponding energy predicted by the pre-trained uMLIP. The target reference data contained energy la-bels only, whereas the replay data included both energy and force labels. Forces required for molecular dynamics and enhanced-sampling calculations were obtained as the negative gradient of the fine-tuned uMLIP energy with respect to the atomic coordinates. Fine-tuning was performed using mace-torch version 0.3.15 with the Adam optimizer [37] and AMSGrad [38] en-abled, an initial learning rate of 1 × 10 −4, a batch size of 16, and a maximum of 301 epochs. The replay dataset comprised a randomly selected 0 .1 % subset of the original pretraining data and was assigned a replay-head weight of 1.0. Global energy and force loss weights of 10 and 1 were used, respec-tively. Because the energy loss is normalized by the number of atoms, errors in the total energy contribute less to the loss for larger systems. To compensate for this system-size depen-dence, configuration-specific energy weights of 10, 100, and 100 were used for the Menshutkin, HKUST-1, and HEA ref-erence data, respectively.   

> D. Downstream atomistic simulations
> 1. Site-resolved Widom insertion calculations

Water adsorption in HKUST-1 at infinite dilution was eval-uated using site-resolved Widom test-particle insertion cal-culations [39] at 295 K. The activated HKUST-1 structure was constructed from the crystal structure reported by Chui et al. [40] by removing the Cu-bound and pore water molecules without further relaxation. The resulting cubic cell had a cell length of 26 .343 Å and was treated as a rigid framework throughout the calculation. The geometry of the inserted wa-ter molecule was taken from the QSCI-TCCSD(T)-in-DFT adsorption-energy calculations reported in Ref. [31] and kept fixed during insertion. For each calculation, 262 144 oxygen positions were sampled uniformly over the periodic cell. At each position, eight independent molecular orientations were sampled uniformly. For each inserted configuration, the water–framework inter-action energy Uint was calculated as 

Uint = EHKUST-1 +H2O − EHKUST-1 − EH2O, (1) where EHKUST-1 +H2O is the energy of the framework contain-ing the inserted water molecule, EHKUST-1 is the energy of the empty framework, and EH2O is the energy of the isolated water molecule. The minimum pair distances were defined as 0.57 times the sum of the corresponding van der Waals radii, fol-lowing the default overlap criterion used in GROMACS [41], and are listed in Table I. Insertion attempts for which any water–framework atom pair was closer than the correspond-ing minimum distance were assigned zero Boltzmann weight 4        

> TABLE I. Minimum pair distances used as cutoffs for Widom inser-tion. Pair Minimum distance (Å) C–H 1.65 C–O 1.84 Cu–H 1.48 Cu–O 1.66 H–H 1.37 H–O 1.55 O–O 1.73

while remaining included in the normalization of the Widom average. To determine site-resolved adsorption properties, each sam-pled oxygen position was assigned to one of four mutually ex-clusive adsorption sites following the definitions of Ref. [42]. Site II comprised positions within 2 .0 Å of the center of a small octahedral cage, whereas Site III comprised positions between 2 .0 Å and 5 .5 Å from the same center. Site I was defined by a distance below 3 .0 Å between the oxygen atom of the inserted water molecule and an open Cu site after ex-cluding positions assigned to Sites II and III. All remaining positions were assigned to Site I ′.The adsorption enthalpy ∆Hs at infinite dilution for site s

was obtained from 

∆Hs = NA

⟨Uint exp (−Uint /kBT )⟩s

⟨exp (−Uint /kBT )⟩s

− RT , (2) where ⟨· · · ⟩ s denotes the average over the sampled oxygen po-sitions assigned to adsorption site s and the eight molecular orientations sampled at each position. NA is the Avogadro constant, kB the Boltzmann constant, R the molar gas con-stant, and T the temperature. The difference in adsorption free energy ∆GI − ∆GI′ between Sites I and I ′ was calculated as 

∆GI − ∆GI′ = −RT ln 

 ⟨exp (−Uint /kBT )⟩I

⟨exp (−Uint /kBT )⟩I′



. (3) The Henry coefficient KH was determined from 

KH = Vcell 

kBT M cell 



exp 



− Uint 

kBT

 

, (4) where the average was taken over all sampled oxygen posi-tions and molecular orientations, Vcell is the volume of the simulation cell, and Mcell is the molar mass of the framework. The calculations were repeated three times. The same in-sertion positions and orientations were used for the pretrained and fine-tuned uMLIPs in each run. Thermodynamic quanti-ties were evaluated separately for each run. Adsorption en-thalpies and adsorption free-energy differences were then av-eraged across the runs, whereas Henry coefficients were aver-aged after taking their logarithms. Two-sided 95 % Student-t

confidence intervals were calculated from the three indepen-dent runs.  

> 2. CO hopping free-energy calculations

The free-energy profile for CO hopping was calculated for a 79-atom IrPdPtRhRu high-entropy alloy (HEA) nanoparticle with composition Ir 16 Pd 16 Pt 16 Rh 16 Ru 15 . The path connected a bridge site between two neighboring Ir atoms and an on-top site on one of the two Ir atoms. The system was modeled with-out periodic boundary conditions, and all atoms were allowed to move during the simulations. A normalized path coordinate ξ was defined from the car-bon positions of the nine reference structures, with each po-sition expressed relative to the midpoint between the two Ir atoms defining the bridge site. A natural cubic spline was fitted through the corresponding relative carbon positions to define a continuous hopping path, with ξ = 0 corresponding to the bridge site and ξ = 1 to the on-top site. During the simulations, the carbon position relative to the Ir–Ir midpoint was projected onto the spline, and the corresponding position along the spline defined the path coordinate ξ . Overall rota-tion of the nanoparticle was suppressed by restraining its ori-entation using a harmonic potential with a force constant of 2000 eV rad −2. The nanoparticle orientation was determined from the positions of the 79 metal atoms. The perpendicu-lar distance z of the carbon position from the spline was re-strained using a flat-bottom harmonic potential, 

Uz(z) = 

(

0 , z ≤ z0 , 

> 12

kz(z − z0)2 , z > z0 , (5) with z0 = 0.15 Å and kz = 10 eV Å −2. No constraint was ap-plied to the C–O bond. Umbrella-sampling simulations [43] were performed with OpenMM 8.5.2 [44] using the pretrained and fine-tuned uM-LIPs through OpenMM-ML 1.7. A harmonic umbrella poten-tial 

Ui(ξ ) = 12 kξ (ξ − ξi)2 (6) was applied in each window, where ξi is the center of win-dow i and kξ = 36 eV. A total of 26 umbrella windows were used along the path coordinate. NVT simulations were per-formed at 300 K using Langevin dynamics with a friction co-efficient of 10 ps −1 and a timestep of 0 .5 fs. Each window was equilibrated for 2 ps, followed by a 10 ps production run, with configurations recorded every 5 fs. The calculations were re-peated five times. Potential-of-mean-force (PMF) profiles were reconstructed separately for each run from the production trajectories using the weighted histogram analysis method (WHAM) [45] as im-plemented in Ref. [46]. The path coordinate was divided into 130 bins from −0.15 to 1 .15, with a convergence tolerance of 1 × 10 −9 eV. The forward and reverse free-energy barriers were obtained from the difference between the PMF maxi-mum and the values at the bridge ( ξ = 0) and on-top ( ξ = 1) endpoints, respectively. Before averaging, each PMF was ref-erenced to its minimum within the bridge region, defined as 

−0.10 ≤ ξ ≤ 0.20. Mean PMFs and two-sided 95 % Student-

t confidence intervals were calculated from the five indepen-dent runs. For visualization, the mean PMF and its confidence 5    

> FIG. 2. Transfer of gas-phase fine-tuning to the confined Men-shutkin reaction. a, Reactant, transition-state, and product struc-tures of the Menshutkin reaction inside a carbon nanotube (CNT), with enlarged views of the reacting species. b, Relative energies of the reactant, transition state (TS), and product obtained with the pretrained and fine-tuned uMLIPs, together with THC-CASPT2 ref-erence values from Ref. [47]. Energies are reported relative to the corresponding reactant. The uMLIP was fine-tuned on quantum-computing-based reference data for the gas-phase Menshutkin reac-tion and evaluated under confinement.

interval were shifted by a constant such that the minimum of the mean PMF was zero.   

> III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION A. Menshutkin reaction inside a carbon nanotube

We first examine whether the correction learned from the gas-phase Menshutkin configurations transfers to the same re-action under confinement in a carbon nanotube (CNT). The confined reactant, transition-state, and product structures were taken from Ref. [48]. Single-point energy calculations were performed for the confined structures with the uMLIP before and after fine-tuning. Reaction energies were reported relative to the confined reactant and compared with the corresponding THC-CASPT2 values from Ref. [47]. The pretrained uMLIP substantially overestimates the barrier height of the confined reaction, predicting 40 .37 kcal mol −1 compared with the THC-CASPT2 reference value of 25 .02 kcal mol −1. After fine-tuning, the barrier de-creases to 29 .83 kcal mol −1, reducing the absolute error from 15 .35 kcal mol −1 to 4 .81 kcal mol −1. In contrast, the product energy increases from 18 .54 kcal mol −1 for the pretrained uMLIP to 23 .37 kcal mol −1 after fine-tuning, increasing the deviation from the reference value of 11 .20 kcal mol −1.As shown in Fig. S1, the fine-tuned uMLIP closely repro-duces the gas-phase reference energies used for fine-tuning, confirming that the gas-phase correction is learned success-fully. The CNT results therefore show that the improvement achieved in the gas phase transfers only partially to the con-fined reaction, with the product energy becoming less accurate after fine-tuning. This suggests that including the target envi-ronment in the fine-tuning data may be important. We there-fore next consider two applications in which the quantum-computing-based calculations explicitly represent the envi-ronment relevant to the downstream simulations.  

> B. Water adsorption thermodynamics in HKUST-1

We next examine whether a water adsorption-energy profile at a Cu site of HKUST-1 obtained from quantum-computing-based calculations can be transferred through MLIP fine-tuning to accurately predict adsorption thermodynamics from Widom insertion calculations (Fig. 3a). The adsorption-energy profile covers the local water–Cu environment of Site I and also includes configurations associated with Site I ′. We compare the adsorption enthalpy and free-energy difference calculated using the pretrained and fine-tuned uMLIPs with reference values reported in Ref. [49] (Fig. 3b,c). For Site I, the pretrained uMLIP underestimates the strength of water adsorption. The adsorption en-thalpy is −28 .8 kJ mol −1, whereas the reference value is 

−48 .0 kJ mol −1. Incorporating the quantum-computing-based adsorption profile through fine-tuning shifts the adsorption enthalpy to −47 .3 kJ mol −1, reducing the absolute deviation from 19 .2 kJ mol −1 to 0 .7 kJ mol −1. Furthermore, the total adsorption enthalpy improves from −26 .7 kJ mol −1

to −47 .3 kJ mol −1, compared with the reference value of 

−46 .1 kJ mol −1.The transferred quantum-computing-based information also improves the relative thermodynamic stability of Sites I and I ′. The free-energy difference changes from 

−8.4 kJ mol −1 with the pretrained uMLIP to −22 .7 kJ mol −1

after fine-tuning. The absolute deviation from the reference value decreases from 12 .6 kJ mol −1 to 1 .7 kJ mol −1.The improvement is more pronounced for the Henry co-efficient, which depends exponentially on the adsorption free energy. The total Henry coefficient increases from 2.0 × 10 −5 mol kg −1 Pa −1 with the pretrained uMLIP to 1 .1 ×

10 −2 mol kg −1 Pa −1 after fine-tuning. Relative to the refer-ence value of 1 .3 × 10 −2 mol kg −1 Pa −1, the pretrained uM-LIP underestimates the Henry coefficient by nearly three or-ders of magnitude, whereas after fine-tuning the discrep-ancy is reduced to approximately 20 %. However, note that the reported uncertainty of the reference value is 3 .4 ×

10 −2 mol kg −1 Pa −1. The comparison therefore mainly shows 6

FIG. 3. Transfer of quantum-computing-based adsorption en-ergetics to adsorption thermodynamics in HKUST-1. a , Widom insertion of water in HKUST-1, highlighting adsorption Sites I and I′. The uMLIP is fine-tuned using quantum-computing-based ref-erence energies along a water–Cu adsorption profile that covers the local environment of Site I and also includes configurations associ-ated with Site I ′. b, Site I adsorption enthalpy at 295 K obtained with the pretrained and fine-tuned uMLIPs, compared with the reference value reported in Ref. [49]. c, Free-energy difference between Sites I and I ′ at 295 K obtained with the pretrained and fine-tuned uMLIPs and compared with the corresponding reference value from Ref. [49]. Error bars for the uMLIP results indicate 95 % confidence intervals from three independent calculations. Error bars for the reference val-ues show the uncertainties reported in Ref. [49]. 

that fine-tuning brings the Henry coefficient into the correct order of magnitude. These results show that quantum-computing-based infor-mation from a limited adsorption-energy profile can be trans-ferred through a uMLIP to adsorption thermodynamics. The corresponding properties are obtained from more than two million insertion configurations in each Widom calculation, whereas only 14 static configurations were used for fine-tuning. The improvements in adsorption enthalpy, relative site free energy, and Henry coefficient thus indicate that the 

FIG. 4. Transfer of quantum-computing reference data from a static hopping pathway to a finite-temperature free-energy pro-file on a high-entropy-alloy nanoparticle. a , CO hopping from a bridge adsorption site ( ξ = 0) to an on-top adsorption site ( ξ = 1) on an IrPdPtRhRu high-entropy-alloy nanoparticle. b, Potential of mean force (PMF) at 300 K obtained from umbrella-sampling simulations using the pretrained uMLIP. c, Corresponding PMF obtained using the uMLIP fine-tuned on the static QSCI-based hopping-energy pro-file. Fine-tuning reverses the relative stability of the two adsorption sites and changes the forward and reverse free-energy barriers. Solid lines show the mean PMFs over five independent runs, and shaded regions indicate the corresponding 95 % confidence intervals. 

influence of the transferred information extends beyond the configurations provided for fine-tuning into the surrounding configurational space. 

C. Free-energy profile for CO hopping on an HEA nanoparticle 

Finally, we examine whether reference data from quantum-computing calculations along a static adsorbate-hopping path-way can be transferred to MD simulations to compute a free-energy profile. In addition to sampling configurations beyond the static reference set, such simulations require force evalu-ations to integrate the equations of motion, whereas the ref-erence data provide only energies. The reference profile de-scribes CO hopping from a bridge site to an on-top site on an IrPdPtRhRu HEA nanoparticle (Fig. 4a). To obtain the free-energy profile, we performed umbrella-sampling simulations at 300 K. The corresponding PMFs for the pretrained and fine-tuned uMLIPs are shown in Figs. 4b and c, respectively. 7With the pretrained model, the forward free-energy barrier from the bridge ( ξ = 0) to the on-top ( ξ = 1) site is 0 .34 eV, while the reverse barrier is 0 .15 eV. The bridge site is favored over the on-top site by 0 .19 eV. After fine-tuning, the site preference is reversed, with the on-top site lying 0 .27 eV be-low the bridge site. The forward barrier decreases to 0 .16 eV, while the reverse barrier increases to 0 .43 eV. For compari-son, studies of CO adsorption on Ir(111) identify the on-top site as the preferred adsorption site [50–52]. Experimental measurements on late-transition-metal surfaces report CO dif-fusion barriers of a few tenths of an electronvolt [53–55]. The site preference after fine-tuning is consistent with these stud-ies, and the forward and reverse barriers are similar in magni-tude to the experimentally reported diffusion barriers. These simulations demonstrate that a uMLIP fine-tuned on a small set of reference energies from quantum-computing-based calculations can be used for enhanced sampling at fi-nite temperature. The reversal of the site preference together with the changes in the free-energy barriers shows that infor-mation from the static reference profile is transferred to the finite-temperature free-energy profile.  

> IV. CONCLUSIONS

We have shown that a small amount of reference data from quantum-computing-based electronic-structure calcula-tions can be incorporated into a pretrained uMLIP through fine-tuning to improve the accuracy of subsequent atomistic calculations and simulations. A single uMLIP was jointly fine-tuned across three chemically distinct systems and evalu-ated upon transfer to a different chemical environment, as well as through Widom insertion calculations and in molecular dy-namics simulations at finite temperature. For the Menshutkin reaction, fine-tuning on gas-phase con-figurations reduced the error in the transition-state energy un-der CNT confinement but increased the error in the product energy, even though the gas-phase reference energies them-selves were reproduced closely. This loss of accuracy may re-flect partial forgetting of pretrained knowledge, which could be mitigated by optimizing the fine-tuning strategy and hyper-parameters. Including the relevant chemical environment di-rectly in the reference data may reduce sensitivity to the fine-tuning protocol. For the HKUST-1 and HEA applications, this was achieved using reference data from previous QSCI-based calculations in which the surrounding environment was treated through DFT embedding. In HKUST-1, incorporating the QSCI-based reference data brought the thermodynamics of water adsorption derived from millions of configurations sampled by Widom insertion into closer agreement with reference values. This indicates that the corrections learned from the sparse reference data extend be-yond the reference configurations into thermodynamically rel-evant regions of the configurational space. For CO hopping on the HEA nanoparticle, enhanced-sampling molecular dynam-ics yielded a free-energy profile that recovered the preference for the on-top over the bridge adsorption sites. This suggests that forces from quantum-computing-based calculations were not required during fine-tuning to obtain stable molecular dy-namics trajectories at finite temperature and that energy-only reference data were sufficient to improve the resulting free-energy profile. Our work demonstrates that quantum computers need not themselves perform all of the energy and force evaluations re-quired for extensive finite-temperature atomistic simulations. Instead, they can be used to calculate highly accurate elec-tronic energies for selected configurations. These energies can then be used to fine-tune a pretrained uMLIP, which serves as a surrogate for the much larger number of evaluations re-quired during configurational sampling. This division of la-bor reduces the requirements for quantum computers to be-come practically useful in simulating complex molecular and materials systems. As quantum-computing-based electronic-structure methods continue to access more challenging prob-lems, we anticipate that the proposed workflow will play an increasingly important role in bridging quantum computing and atomistic simulation.  

> V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by MEXT Quantum Leap Flagship Program (MEXTQLEAP) Grant No. JP-MXS0120319794 and the JST COI-NEXT Program Grant No. JPMJPF2014, and the JST ASPIRE Program Grant No. JPMJAP2319. A part of this work was supported by the Cross-ministerial Strategic Innovation Promotion Program (SIP), and JST Moonshot R&D Grant No. JPMJMS256J. We thank the Supercomputer Center, the Institute for Solid State Physics, the University of Tokyo, for allowing us to use their facilities. Part of the calculations were performed using the Genkai supercomputer of the Research Institute for Information Technology, Kyushu University, and the Miyabi supercomputer at the Information Technology Center, The University of Tokyo. This work was also achieved using the SQUID and OCTOPUS supercomputers at D3 Center, The University of Osaka.     

> [1] Observation of constructive interference at the edge of quantum ergodicity, Nature 646 , 825 (2025). [2] T. I. Andersen, N. Astrakhantsev, A. H. Karamlou, J. Berndts-son, J. Motruk, A. Szasz, J. A. Gross, A. Schuckert, T. West-erhout, Y. Zhang, et al. , Thermalization and criticality on an analogue–digital quantum simulator, Nature 638 , 79 (2025). [3] R. Haghshenas, E. Chertkov, M. Mills, W. Kadow, S.-H. Lin, Y.-H. Chen, C. Cade, I. Niesen, T. Beguši´ c, M. S. Rudolph,
> et al. , Digital quantum magnetism on a trapped-ion quantum computer, Nature 653 , 56 (2026). [4] L. E. Fischer, M. Leahy, A. Eddins, N. Keenan, D. Ferracin, M. A. Rossi, Y. Kim, A. He, F. Pietracaprina, B. Sokolov,

8

et al. , Dynamical simulations of many-body quantum chaos on a quantum computer, Nature Physics 22 , 302 (2026). [5] Y. Cao, J. Romero, J. P. Olson, M. Degroote, P. D. John-son, M. Kieferová, I. D. Kivlichan, T. Menke, B. Peropadre, N. P. D. Sawaya, S. Sim, L. Veis, and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Quan-tum Chemistry in the Age of Quantum Computing, Chem. Rev. 

119 , 10856 (2019). [6] S. McArdle, S. Endo, A. Aspuru-Guzik, S. C. Benjamin, and X. Yuan, Quantum computational chemistry, Rev. Mod. Phys. 

92 , 015003 (2020). [7] G. H. Low, R. King, D. W. Berry, Q. Han, A. E. DePrince III, A. F. White, R. Babbush, R. D. Somma, and N. C. Rubin, Fast quantum simulation of electronic structure by spectral amplifi-cation, Physical Review X 15 , 041016 (2025). [8] J. Tilly, H. Chen, S. Cao, D. Picozzi, K. Setia, Y. Li, E. Grant, L. Wossnig, I. Rungger, G. H. Booth, and J. Tennyson, The Variational Quantum Eigensolver: A review of methods and best practices, Phys. Rep. 986 , 1 (2022). [9] T. Jiang, J. Zhang, M. K. A. Baumgarten, M.-F. Chen, H. Q. Dinh, A. Ganeshram, N. Maskara, A. Ni, and J. Lee, Walking through Hilbert Space with Quantum Computers, Chemical Re-views 125 , 4569 (2025). [10] A. K. S. V., A. K. Patra, M. Mukherjee, A. Shukla, S. Shankar P., R. Bhat, R. T. S. L., and J. G, Towards Chemically Ac-curate and Scalable Quantum Simulations on IQM Quantum Hardware: A Quantum-HPC Hybrid Approach, arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2604.01983 (2026), arXiv:2604.01983 [quant-ph]. [11] K. Kanno, M. Kohda, R. Imai, S. Koh, K. Mitarai, W. Mizukami, and Y. O. Nakagawa, Quantum-selected config-uration interaction: Classical diagonalization of Hamiltonians in subspaces selected by quantum computers, Phys. Rev. Res. 

8, 023268 (2026). [12] V. Khinevich and W. Mizukami, Enhancing quantum computa-tions with the synergy of auxiliary field quantum Monte Carlo and computational basis tomography (2025), arXiv:2502.20066 [quant-ph]. [13] L. Erhart, Y. Yoshida, V. Khinevich, and W. Mizukami, Coupled cluster method tailored with quantum computing, Phys. Rev. Res. 6, 023230 (2024). [14] L. Erhart, Y. Yoshida, and W. Mizukami, Coupled cluster method tailored by quantum selected configuration interaction (2025), arXiv:2506.16911 [physics]. [15] Y. Yoshida, L. Erhart, T. Murokoshi, R. Nakagawa, C. Mori, T. Miyanaga, T. Mori, and W. Mizukami, Auxiliary-field quan-tum Monte Carlo method with quantum selected configuration interaction (2025), arXiv:2502.21081 [quant-ph]. [16] J. Robledo-Moreno, M. Motta, H. Haas, A. Javadi-Abhari, P. Jurcevic, W. Kirby, S. Martiel, K. Sharma, S. Sharma, T. Shi-rakawa, I. Sitdikov, R.-Y. Sun, K. J. Sung, M. Takita, M. C. Tran, S. Yunoki, and A. Mezzacapo, Chemistry beyond the scale of exact diagonalization on a quantum-centric supercom-puter, Sci. Adv. 11 , eadu9991 (2025). [17] R. Babbush, J. R. McClean, M. Newman, C. Gidney, S. Boixo, and H. Neven, Focus beyond quadratic speedups for error-corrected quantum advantage, PRX quantum 2, 010103 (2021). [18] T. Shiota, K. Gunst, T. Mori, T. Shiozaki, and W. Mizukami, In-tegrating Classical and Quantum Software for Enhanced Simu-lation of Realistic Chemical Systems (2025), arXiv:2506.18877 [physics.chem-ph]. [19] S. Das, S. Bhowmik, Z. Li, M. Bazayeva, D. Kaliakin, A. Sha-jan, and K. M. Merz, Quantum Computing Enabled ab ini-tio Molecular Dynamics Simulations (2026), arXiv:2607.28548 [physics.chem-ph]. [20] J. Behler and M. Parrinello, Generalized Neural-Network Rep-resentation of High-Dimensional Potential-Energy Surfaces, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98 , 146401 (2007). [21] V. L. Deringer, M. A. Caro, and G. Csányi, Machine Learning Interatomic Potentials as Emerging Tools for Materials Science, Advanced Materials 31 , 1902765 (2019). [22] O. T. Unke, S. Chmiela, H. E. Sauceda, M. Gastegger, I. Poltavsky, K. T. Schütt, A. Tkatchenko, and K.-R. Müller, Machine Learning Force Fields, Chem. Rev. 121 , 10142 (2021). [23] E. Kocer, T. W. Ko, and J. Behler, Neural Network Potentials: A Concise Overview of Methods, Annual Review of Physical Chemistry 73 , 163 (2022). [24] R. Jacobs, D. Morgan, S. Attarian, J. Meng, C. Shen, Z. Wu, C. Y. Xie, J. H. Yang, N. Artrith, B. Blaiszik, G. Ceder, K. Choudhary, G. Csanyi, E. D. Cubuk, B. Deng, R. Drautz, X. Fu, J. Godwin, V. Honavar, O. Isayev, A. Johansson, B. Kozinsky, S. Martiniani, S. P. Ong, I. Poltavsky, KJ. Schmidt, S. Takamoto, A. P. Thompson, J. Westermayr, and B. M. Wood, A practical guide to machine learning interatomic potentials – Status and future, Current Opinion in Solid State and Materials Science 35 , 101214 (2025). [25] A. Peruzzo, J. McClean, P. Shadbolt, M.-H. Yung, X.-Q. Zhou, P. J. Love, A. Aspuru-Guzik, and J. L. O’Brien, A variational eigenvalue solver on a photonic quantum processor, Nat. Com-mun. 5, 4213 (2014). [26] C. Chen and S. P. Ong, A universal graph deep learning inter-atomic potential for the periodic table, Nat. Comput. Sci. 2, 718 (2022). [27] B. Deng, P. Zhong, K. Jun, J. Riebesell, K. Han, C. J. Bartel, and G. Ceder, CHGNet as a pretrained universal neural network potential for charge-informed atomistic modelling, Nat Mach Intell 5, 1031 (2023). [28] H. Yang, C. Hu, Y. Zhou, X. Liu, Y. Shi, J. Li, G. Li, Z. Chen, S. Chen, C. Zeni, M. Horton, R. Pinsler, A. Fowler, D. Zügner, T. Xie, J. Smith, L. Sun, Q. Wang, L. Kong, C. Liu, H. Hao, and Z. Lu, MatterSim: A Deep Learning Atomistic Model Across Elements, Temperatures and Pressures (2024), arXiv:2405.04967 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]. [29] T. Shiota, K. Ishihara, T. M. Do, T. Mori, and W. Mizukami, Taming Multi-Domain, -Fidelity Data: Towards Foun-dation Models for Atomistic Scale Simulations (2024), arXiv:2412.13088 [physics]. [30] I. Batatia, P. Benner, Y. Chiang, A. M. Elena, D. P. Kovács, J. Riebesell, X. R. Advincula, M. Asta, M. Avaylon, W. J. Bald-win, F. Berger, N. Bernstein, A. Bhowmik, F. Bigi, S. M. Blau, V. C˘ arare, M. Ceriotti, S. Chong, J. P. Darby, S. De, F. Della Pia, V. L. Deringer, R. Elijošius, Z. El-Machachi, E. Fako, F. Fal-cioni, A. C. Ferrari, J. L. A. Gardner, M. J. Gawkowski, A. Genreith-Schriever, J. George, R. E. A. Goodall, J. Grandel, C. P. Grey, P. Grigorev, S. Han, W. Handley, H. H. Heenen, K. Hermansson, C. H. Ho, S. Hofmann, C. Holm, J. Jaafar, K. S. Jakob, H. Jung, V. Kapil, A. D. Kaplan, N. Karimitari, J. R. Kermode, P. Kourtis, N. Kroupa, J. Kullgren, M. C. Kuner, D. Kuryla, G. Liepuoniute, C. Lin, J. T. Margraf, I.-B. Magd˘ au, A. Michaelides, J. H. Moore, A. A. Naik, S. P. Niblett, S. W. Norwood, N. O’Neill, C. Ortner, K. A. Persson, K. Reuter, A. S. Rosen, L. A. M. Rosset, L. L. Schaaf, C. Schran, B. X. Shi, E. Sivonxay, T. K. Stenczel, C. Sutton, V. Svahn, T. D. Swinburne, J. Tilly, C. Van Der Oord, S. Vargas, E. Varga-Umbrich, T. Vegge, M. Vondrák, Y. Wang, W. C. Witt, T. Wolf, F. Zills, and G. Csányi, A foundation model for atomistic mate-rials chemistry, J. Chem. Phys. 163 , 184110 (2025). [31] T. M. Do, Y. Yoshida, T. Shiota, and W. Mizukami, Quantum computing for accurate large-scale electronic-structure calcu-9

lations: DFT-embedded, post-processed quantum-selected con-figuration interaction (2026), arXiv:2606.06015 [physics.chem-ph]. [32] S. J. R. Lee, M. Welborn, F. R. Manby, and T. F. I. Miller, Projection-Based Wavefunction-in-DFT Embedding, Acc. Chem. Res. 52 , 1359 (2019). [33] I. Batatia, D. P. Kovacs, G. N. C. Simm, C. Ortner, and G. Csanyi, MACE: Higher Order Equivariant Message Pass-ing Neural Networks for Fast and Accurate Force Fields, in 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , Vol. 35 (2022) pp. 11423–11436. [34] R. Drautz, Atomic cluster expansion for accurate and transfer-able interatomic potentials, Phys. Rev. B 99 , 014104 (2019). [35] S. Batzner, A. Musaelian, L. Sun, M. Geiger, J. P. Mailoa, M. Kornbluth, N. Molinari, T. E. Smidt, and B. Kozinsky, E(3)-equivariant graph neural networks for data-efficient and accu-rate interatomic potentials, Nat. Commun. 13 , 2453 (2022). [36] T. L. Tompa, E. Varga-Umbrich, I. Batatia, A. M. Elena, N. Bernstein, and G. Csányi, Fine-tuning MLIP foundation models: Strategies for accuracy and transferability (2026), arXiv:2606.12704 [physics.chem-ph]. [37] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic opti-mization, in International Conference on Learning Representa-tions (2015). [38] S. J. Reddi, S. Kale, and S. Kumar, On the convergence of adam and beyond, in International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations (2018). [39] B. Widom, Some Topics in the Theory of Fluids, J. Chem. Phys. 

39 , 2808 (1963). [40] S. S.-Y. Chui, S. M.-F. Lo, J. P. H. Charmant, A. G. Orpen, and I. D. Williams, A Chemically Functionalizable Nanoporous Material [Cu3(TMA)2(H2O)3]n, Science 283 , 1148 (1999). [41] M. J. Abraham, T. Murtola, R. Schulz, S. Páll, J. C. Smith, B. Hess, and E. Lindahl, GROMACS: High performance molecular simulations through multi-level parallelism from lap-tops to supercomputers, SoftwareX 1–2 , 19 (2015). [42] E. García-Pérez, J. Gascón, V. Morales-Flórez, J. M. Castillo, F. Kapteijn, and S. Calero, Identification of Adsorption Sites in Cu-BTC by Experimentation and Molecular Simulation, Lang-muir 25 , 1725 (2009). [43] G. M. Torrie and J. P. Valleau, Nonphysical sampling distribu-tions in Monte Carlo free-energy estimation: Umbrella sam-pling, J. Comput. Phys. 23 , 187 (1977). [44] P. Eastman, R. Galvelis, R. P. Peláez, C. R. A. Abreu, S. E. Farr, E. Gallicchio, A. Gorenko, M. M. Henry, F. Hu, J. Huang, A. Krämer, J. Michel, J. A. Mitchell, V. S. Pande, J. P. Ro-drigues, J. Rodriguez-Guerra, A. C. Simmonett, S. Singh, J. Swails, P. Turner, Y. Wang, I. Zhang, J. D. Chodera, G. De Fabritiis, and T. E. Markland, OpenMM 8: Molecu-lar Dynamics Simulation with Machine Learning Potentials, J. Phys. Chem. B 128 , 109 (2024). [45] S. Kumar, J. M. Rosenberg, D. Bouzida, R. H. Swendsen, and P. A. Kollman, THE weighted histogram analysis method for free-energy calculations on biomolecules. I. The method, J. Comput. Chem. 13 , 1011 (1992). [46] A. Grossfield, WHAM: An implementation of the weighted his-togram analysis method, https://github.com/agrossfield/wham (2026). [47] C. Song and T. J. Martínez, Reduced scaling CASPT2 using supporting subspaces and tensor hyper-contraction, J. Chem. Phys. 149 , 044108 (2018). [48] P. Giacinto, F. Zerbetto, A. Bottoni, and M. Calvaresi, CNT-Confinement Effects on the Menshutkin SN2 Reaction: The Role of Nonbonded Interactions, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 12 ,4082 (2016). [49] J. M. Castillo, T. J. H. Vlugt, and S. Calero, Understanding Wa-ter Adsorption in Cu-BTC Metal-Organic Frameworks, J. Phys. Chem. C 112 , 15934 (2008). [50] W. P. Krekelberg, J. Greeley, and M. Mavrikakis, Atomic and Molecular Adsorption on Ir(111), J. Phys. Chem. B 108 , 987 (2004). [51] H. Noei, D. Franz, M. Creutzburg, P. Müller, K. Krausert, E. Grånäs, R. Taube, F. Mittendorfer, and A. Stierle, Monitoring the Interaction of CO with Graphene Supported Ir Clusters by Vibrational Spectroscopy and Density Functional Theory Cal-culations, J. Phys. Chem. C 122 , 4281 (2018). [52] X. Li, T. Haunold, S. Werkovits, L. D. Marks, P. Blaha, and G. Rupprechter, CO Adsorption and Disproportionation on Smooth and Defect-Rich Ir(111), J. Phys. Chem. C 126 , 6578 (2022). [53] E. G. Seebauer, A. C. F. Kong, and L. D. Schmidt, Surface dif-fusion of hydrogen and CO on Rh(111): Laser-induced thermal desorption studies, J. Chem. Phys. 88 , 6597 (1988). [54] A. A. Deckert, J. L. Brand, M. V. Arena, and S. M. George, Surface diffusion of carbon monoxide on Ru(001) studied us-ing laser-induced thermal desorption, Surface Science 208 , 441 (1989). [55] J. Ma, X. Xiao, N. J. DiNardo, and M. M. T. Loy, Diffusion of CO on Pt(111) studied by an optical diffraction method, Phys. Rev. B 58 , 4977 (1998). 10 

VI. SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION 

FIG. S1. Fine-tuning of the gas-phase Menshutkin reaction . Rela-tive energies of the reactant, transition state (TS), and product for the Menshutkin reaction obtained with the pretrained and fine-tuned uM-LIP, together with QSCI-TCCSD(T) reference values from Ref. [31].