AGENTBETTA: VERIFICATION-DRIVEN ADAPTIVE
CONFIGURATION OF AN AI NANO-AGENT THROUGH
SELECTIVE EXPANSION AND VERIFIED CONTRACTION
Md. Ashraful Babu1,2
1Department of Physical Sciences
2Explainable Artificial Intelligence and Optimization Research (XAiOR)
Independent University, Bangladesh
Dhaka, 1245, Bangladesh.
ashraful388@gmail.com; ashraful388@iub.edu.bd
September 22, 2026
ABSTRACT
Large language model agents are typically deployed with predefined configurations, although the
required model capability, context, tools, permissions, memory, and computational resources can vary
substantially across tasks. This study develops and evaluates AgentBetta, an adaptive AI Nano-Agent
framework that represents these factors as an executable configuration and updates them through
verification-driven diagnosis, selective expansion, and verification-based counterfactual contraction.
The evaluation distinguishes controlled mechanism validation from external agent comparisons.
On the AB-ConfigBench benchmark, AgentBetta achieved 91.38% verified success while reducing
median context allocation from 64,000 to 8,000 context characters and median tool exposure from
five tools to zero compared with the fully provisioned configuration. The configuration-deficiency
diagnosis achieved a macro-F1 score of 0.819 with precision of 1.000 across the evaluated dimen-
sions, and selective expansion avoided unnecessary changes to unrelated configuration dimensions.
Post-success contraction preserved verification outcomes in 56.41% of evaluated one-dimension
contraction probes, indicating that some successful configurations contained removable capability
under the tested conditions. External evaluations indicate that adaptive configuration can improve the
balance between verified task completion and capability exposure; however, the results vary across
benchmarks and agent families. In particular, the cross-family replication did not reproduce the
primary-backbone accuracy ordering, and specialized systems remained advantageous for certain task
domains. These results support interpreting AgentBetta as a configuration-adaptation mechanism that
regulates capability allocation and inference expenditure rather than as a universal replacement for
specialized agent architectures.
Keywords adaptive AI agents · Nano-Agent · capability configuration · verification-driven adaptation · selective
expansion · counterfactual contraction · resource-aware agent systems · large language models.
1
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) become operational agents when model inference is coupled with external actions,
environmental observations, memory, and control logic. Early work established several elements that are now standard in
agentic systems: interleaved reasoning and acting [1], learned use of external tools [2], trial-to-trial improvement through
linguistic feedback [3], and controller-based delegation to heterogeneous expert models [4]. These developments shifted
the design problem from selecting a language model alone to constructing an executable system around the model. For
a given task, performance can depend on the selected model, the information made visible to it, the available tools, the
authority granted to those tools, the memory state, the resource budget, and the rules governing when execution should
stop, retry, or escalate.
arXiv:2609.23512v1  [cs.AI]  20 Sep 2026


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
Most deployed agent systems nevertheless retain a substantial amount of configuration that is fixed before a task begins.
A capable model may be exposed to a large context, a broad tool catalogue, permissive execution rights, persistent
memory, and generous token or turn budgets even when the task requires only a small subset of these facilities. The
converse problem also occurs: a deliberately economical configuration may omit information or capability required
by a more demanding task. The resulting tension is not only between accuracy and monetary cost. Excess context
can dilute relevant evidence, large toolsets can increase selection ambiguity, broad authorization enlarges the action
surface, and unnecessary iterations increase both latency and the probability of execution error. Conversely, aggressive
reduction can induce repeated retrieval, compensatory tool calls, or failure to complete the task. The central design
question is therefore not whether an agent should always be “small” or always be “powerful”, but how its executable
configuration should be matched to the requirements of the current task and revised when those requirements become
clearer during execution.
To investigate this problem, this study develops and evaluates AgentBetta, an adaptive AI Nano-Agent based on
verification-driven configuration control. The term Nano-Agent is used here as an operational descriptor rather than
as a claim of a new agent category: AgentBetta is intended to begin with a task-appropriate, bounded configuration
and to acquire additional capability only when the execution evidence justifies it. A demanding task may consequently
use a high-capability model, a larger context, additional tools, or longer execution limits; the “nano” property refers
to avoiding unjustified allocation rather than to enforcing a permanently small model or a fixed resource ceiling. The
executable configuration is represented as
X = (M, C, T, P, Mem, R, τ, I) ,
(1)
where M denotes model capability, C the model-visible context, T the exposed tools, P the permission or authority set,
Mem the available memory, R quantitative computational or monetary resources, τ time/turn/retry bounds, and I other
interaction limits. AgentBetta treats X as a task-conditioned control object rather than as a static deployment choice.
1.1
Related literature and positioning
The literature has already established that agent structure and resource allocation materially affect both task performance
and execution cost. Automated workflow design methods make the control structure itself an optimization variable.
AFlow searches over code-represented workflows using Monte Carlo Tree Search and execution feedback, showing
that automatically discovered workflows can improve task performance while reducing reliance on manual design
[5]. Complementary empirical work on efficient agents examines the effect of backbone choice, planning, tool use,
memory, and test-time scaling on the cost–performance trade-off, demonstrating that additional agent components do
not contribute uniformly across tasks [6]. AgentSlimming addresses overprovisioned multi-agent workflows directly by
pruning agent nodes and replacing expensive node models with lower-cost alternatives under a validation rule designed
to avoid unacceptable performance loss [7]. These studies establish that agentic systems can contain substantial
structural and computational redundancy; they also show that efficiency cannot be inferred from task success alone.
A complementary body of work addresses input-dependent agent configuration. ARC formulates query-wise agent
configuration as a semi-Markov decision process and learns a hierarchical policy over workflow structure, tools, token
budgets, and prompt fragments [8]. AOrchestra represents a dynamically instantiated sub-agent as a tuple comprising
instruction, context, tools, and model, enabling a central orchestrator to create task-specific executors during a long-
horizon trajectory [9]. ToolOrchestra trains a lightweight orchestrator to choose among heterogeneous tools and stronger
language models while optimizing outcome quality, efficiency, and user tool preferences [10]. AgentFlow instead places
learning inside the multi-turn execution loop: a planner, executor, verifier, and generator interact through evolving
memory, while the planner is optimized from trajectory-level outcome feedback [11]. Eureka extends task-conditioned
architecture formation further by constructing dynamic obligation graphs and specialized macro-agents with local
state, memory, operators, tools, verifiers, and topology for long-horizon scientific tasks [12]. Collectively, these studies
establish dynamic model selection, tool selection, context allocation, and task-conditioned architecture formation as
existing research directions.
Recent work also addresses the amount of execution that a task warrants. E3 formalizes minimum-sufficient execution
and uses an Estimate–Execute–Expand procedure: it predicts an initial operating point, attempts a minimum viable
path, and widens execution scope when verification fails [13]. This result is especially relevant to AgentBetta because it
establishes that a lean initial execution followed by verification-driven expansion is already a defined research direction.
Accordingly, the present contribution does not lie in the general principle of “starting small” or in escalation after
failure. The remaining methodological question is whether failure evidence can be attributed to particular dimensions
of a heterogeneous agent configuration and whether only those dimensions can be expanded without silently increasing
unrelated capability.
Individual configuration dimensions have also been studied in depth. ToolScope reduces ambiguity and prompt burden
by merging overlapping tools and retrieving a task-relevant subset from large tool libraries [14]. TRACER learns
2


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
Table 1: Positioning of AgentBetta relative to closely related adaptive-agent methods. The entries describe each
method’s primary optimization scope rather than every auxiliary capability of the corresponding implementation.
Method
Primary adaptive object
Runtime feedback or adaptation
Principal distinction from the present study
ARC [8]
Workflow, tools, budget,
prompts
Learns query-wise configura-
tions from correctness and cost
Does not make post-failure configuration-
dimension diagnosis and verified post-success
contraction the central runtime loop.
E3 [13]
Execution scope
Verification failure triggers pro-
gressive scope expansion
Establishes lean execution and recovery, but
primarily varies execution footprint rather than
a general heterogeneous configuration.
AOrchestra [9]
Instruction,
context,
tools, model
Creates specialized sub-agents
during execution and learns or-
chestration from trajectories
Establishes runtime model/context/tool special-
ization; permissions, resource bounds, and con-
figuration contraction are outside its principal
abstraction.
AgentFlow [11]
Planning and tool-use
policy
Verifier signals and final out-
comes support in-flow policy
learning
Verification-driven learning is central, whereas
the full executable configuration is not the pri-
mary optimization variable.
CHILL-Harness
[19]
Harness workflow inter-
ventions
Counterfactual effect estimates
authorize advantageous work-
flow changes
Establishes counterfactual harness control
rather than explicit necessity testing over
model, context, tools, permissions, memory,
and resources.
AgentSlimming
[7]
Multi-agent
workflow
nodes and node models
Candidate pruning/replacement
is re-evaluated against an accep-
tance threshold
Establishes validated structural contraction,
mainly at workflow/task level rather than as
per-instance bidirectional configuration adapta-
tion.
Agent Contracts /
PAuth / CAPMAS
[16–18]
Resources and autho-
rization
Contracts
and
authorization
checks impose execution bounds
Establish governance mechanisms that an adap-
tive controller must respect; they do not jointly
optimize the broader executable configuration.
AgentBetta
(pro-
posed)
Model, context, tools,
permissions,
memory,
resources, and execu-
tion/interaction bounds
Verification produces structured
insufficiency
evidence;
con-
trolled success-side trials update
configuration evidence
Integrates heterogeneous configuration control,
dimension-selective expansion, verified con-
traction, policy boundaries, and history-based
initialization within one runtime formulation.
per-tool context-retention ratios and explicitly prices downstream tool re-invocation, showing that context reduction can
create hidden reacquisition costs even when the immediate compression appears beneficial [15]. Resource governance
is formalized by Agent Contracts, which defines multidimensional resource and temporal bounds together with success
and termination criteria and conservation constraints for delegated budgets [16]. Authorization research addresses a
different but related form of excess capability. PAuth derives task-scoped operation constraints from natural-language
requests and checks whether concrete operations are implied by the task [17], whereas CAPMAS maps natural-language
requests to bounded privilege sets and propagates attenuable capability tokens through multi-agent delegation [18].
These studies show that context, tools, resources, and permissions each admit specialized control mechanisms. They
also indicate that efficiency and authority exposure should not be treated as interchangeable quantities: a low-cost
configuration may still be overprivileged, and a tightly authorized configuration may still waste model or context
resources.
Recent studies have also examined adaptation after execution evidence becomes available. CHILL-Harness formulates
harness adaptation as a causal intervention problem and learns when alternative orchestration workflows have sufficient
expected advantage to justify intervention [19]. AgentSlimming validates successive structural reductions against
a performance threshold [7]. ClawTrace records cost-attributed execution traces and uses them to derive preserve,
prune, and repair rules; notably, its prune rules are extracted from successful trajectories rather than only from
failures [20]. TRACER uses counterfactual consequence attribution at the level of retained tool outputs [15]. Thus,
counterfactual analysis, pruning after successful behavior, and cost-aware adaptation are themselves established ideas.
A remaining methodological gap is whether these mechanisms can be applied to the whole executable configuration
within a bidirectional runtime process: failure-side diagnosis and selective expansion followed, when appropriate, by
success-side contraction and independent re-verification.
Table 1 summarizes the closest methodological relationships. The comparison is intentionally stated in terms of each
method’s primary optimization object; it is not intended to imply that a listed system is incapable of auxiliary behaviors
outside its principal scope.
3


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
1.2
Research gap
The reviewed literature leaves a narrower gap than the general problem of adaptive agents. First, configuration
optimization remains distributed across partially overlapping research threads. ARC and AOrchestra cover several
important dimensions, whereas context-management, tool-filtering, resource-governance, and authorization methods
typically optimize their respective dimensions separately. A task, however, can fail because of interactions among these
dimensions. A weak model with complete evidence, a strong model with incomplete evidence, a correctly selected
tool without sufficient authorization, and an adequate configuration constrained by an insufficient turn budget can all
produce an unsuccessful run for different reasons. Treating these cases as the same generic failure obscures the control
decision that should follow.
Second, verification is commonly used to determine whether another attempt is required, but a binary failure signal
does not by itself identify which part of the configuration is deficient. Scope expansion in E3 is a principled recovery
mechanism [13]; AgentFlow uses verifier feedback to improve action planning [11]; CHILL-Harness evaluates
alternative workflow interventions [19]. What remains insufficiently characterized is a configuration-level diagnostic
map
D(f) ⊆{M, C, T, P, Mem, R, τ, I} ,
(2)
where D(f) denotes the subset of configuration dimensions implicated by the evidence associated with failure or
indeterminate verification. Such a representation enables a direct experimental comparison between dimension-selective
expansion and broader escalation policies. The distinction is consequential: increasing model capability when the actual
deficiency is authorization or missing evidence can increase cost without correcting the cause of failure.
Third, expansion and contraction are usually studied as separate optimization problems. E3 expands execution scope
after failure [13]; AgentSlimming removes agent nodes or substitutes cheaper models from an existing workflow
[7]; ClawTrace derives efficiency-oriented prune rules from successful traces [20]; and CHILL-Harness evaluates
counterfactual workflow interventions [19]. These approaches motivate, but do not by themselves establish, a unified
runtime process in which the same configuration representation supports both directions of adaptation. A successful
configuration is feasible, but success does not establish that every allocated capability was necessary. Conversely, the
fact that a tool, context item, permission, or larger model was not visibly used in one trace is not sufficient evidence that
it can be removed. Necessity must be tested under an explicit counterfactual protocol.
Fourth, cross-task adaptation often learns prompts, skills, routes, or workflows rather than an empirical relationship
between task characteristics and configurations that have been independently verified under a declared protocol. This
distinction becomes important when configuration dimensions have different cost and risk semantics. For example,
reducing the context window and removing write permission are not commensurate interventions, although both reduce
exposure. A reusable configuration history should therefore retain the task features, exact configuration, adaptation
sequence, verification outcome, resource measurements, and unsuccessful contraction trials. Such a history can support
more informed initialization, but a previously verified configuration is not necessarily minimal: unless contraction
evidence is available, successful historical configurations may remain overprovisioned. Failed contraction trials are
therefore important because omitting them would systematically bias the empirical frontier toward configurations that
appear cheaper only because contrary evidence was discarded.
Adaptation itself incurs computational and operational overhead. Failure diagnosis, additional verifier calls, re-execution,
and counterfactual contraction can consume more resources than they save on a one-off task. Recent context work
similarly shows that an apparently economical reduction can transfer cost to later reacquisition [15]. A practical adaptive
controller therefore requires an explicit accounting of adaptation overhead and, for optional learning experiments, a
criterion for whether the expected future benefit justifies the cost of collecting additional evidence.
To address these gaps, this study develops AgentBetta as a verification-driven, bidirectional configuration controller. The
initial configuration is inferred from task characteristics and, when sufficiently supported, prior verified run evidence.
If verification fails or remains indeterminate, structured diagnostic evidence is mapped to one or more configuration
dimensions and only admissible deficient dimensions are expanded when possible. After verified success, controlled
environments may be used to construct reduced counterfactual configurations; these configurations are re-executed
and independently verified rather than being declared sufficient from trace inspection alone. Evidence from successful
and unsuccessful expansion and contraction trials is retained as an empirical verified configuration frontier that can
be consulted during subsequent initialization. This history mechanism is treated as a warm-start aid rather than as
evidence that the selected starting configuration is minimal. Hard policy constraints remain outside the adaptive
controller: prediction that additional authority would be useful can generate a request, but it cannot authorize that
authority autonomously.
The key contributions of this study are as follows:
4


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
• Development and implementation of a verification-driven adaptive AI Nano-Agent. This study develops
and implements AgentBetta, an adaptive AI Nano-Agent that represents model capability, context exposure,
tools, permissions, memory, resources, execution bounds, and interaction limits jointly as the executable
configuration X = (M, C, T, P, Mem, R, τ, I). The configuration can be selectively revised in response to
runtime verification evidence while remaining subject to explicit policy constraints.
• Verification-driven capability adaptation. AgentBetta introduces a task-conditioned adaptation loop that
combines configuration diagnosis, selective expansion, execution verification, and evidence-based capability
adjustment. The adaptation process is constrained by predefined policies rather than unrestricted model
decisions.
• Verification-guided contraction evaluation. Following verified task completion, AgentBetta constructs
controlled single-dimension contraction candidates and accepts a reduction only when re-execution under the
reduced configuration remains verified according to the declared evaluation protocol. The procedure evaluates
removable capability exposure under controlled conditions rather than performing unrestricted automatic
minimization.
• Capability exposure and resource-aware evaluation. The framework separately measures task success,
capability exposure, inference expenditure, and adaptation overhead, enabling analysis of the trade-off between
verified completion and unnecessary capability activation.
• Auditable adaptive agent execution. AgentBetta records configuration states, adaptation decisions, verifica-
tion outcomes, and execution traces to support reproducible analysis of adaptive agent behavior.
The contribution claims concern the proposed formulation and implemented control mechanisms and do not imply
global optimality or universal superiority over existing agents.
2
Methodology
2.1
Methodological scope and design objective
AgentBetta is formulated as an adaptive AI Nano-Agent whose executable configuration is treated as a task-dependent
control variable rather than as a fixed deployment choice. The term Nano-Agent denotes an operational principle:
the runtime should allocate no more model capability, context, tools, authority, memory, or computational resources
than are justified by the current task state and the evidence accumulated during execution. It does not imply that the
underlying language model must be small, nor does it impose a permanently minimal configuration. A demanding task
may therefore require a high-capability model, a larger evidence window, additional tools, or longer execution limits,
provided that these additions are justified by verification evidence and remain within the applicable safety policy.
The method is designed around a bidirectional control process. Before execution, AgentBetta estimates a suitable
initial configuration. During execution, task-specific verification is used to determine whether the current configuration
is sufficient. When execution is unsuccessful or remains unverifiable, a diagnosis stage identifies the configuration
dimensions that are plausibly responsible for the insufficiency, and only those dimensions are expanded where possible.
After verified success, controlled counterfactual contraction may be performed in benchmark or learning settings to
determine whether a smaller configuration preserves task success. Evidence from both expansion and contraction trials
is retained for optional history-informed initialization of subsequent, related tasks. This reuse is treated as a warm-start
mechanism whose effect on adaptation effort and starting exposure must be established empirically rather than assumed.
This formulation distinguishes the proposed control problem from the underlying agent loop itself. Interleaved reasoning,
action, and observation are established components of language-agent systems [1], while recent work has separately
examined query-conditioned agent configuration [8], dynamic sub-agent construction [9], verification-driven scope
expansion [13], resource-bounded execution [16], and workflow contraction [7]. AgentBetta uses these developments
as methodological context; the present method focuses on the coordinated adaptation of a heterogeneous configuration
under explicit verification and policy constraints.
Figure 1 shows the implementation-level organization used to realize this formulation. Task characterization and policy
constraints feed an adaptive configuration engine that coordinates provider selection, exposed tools, runtime verification,
adaptation events, and run recording. The architecture deliberately separates provider availability, tool availability,
configuration state, and verification so that a change in one dimension does not silently widen the others.
5


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
Figure 1: Overall AgentBetta system architecture. The adaptive configuration engine maintains the executable
configuration while provider and tool registries expose only policy-admissible capabilities. Runtime validators determine
whether execution is acceptable, and run records preserve verification outcomes, adaptation history, and empirical
configuration evidence.
2.2
Task model and executable configuration
A task is represented as
q = (u, E, V, Π) ,
(3)
where u is the user instruction, E denotes the accessible execution environment, V is the task-specific verification
procedure, and Π denotes immutable user and system policies that bound admissible actions. The environment may
contain local files, structured data, software repositories, deterministic computation tools, or permitted external services.
The verification procedure is defined independently of the adaptive controller wherever an objective evaluator is
available.
At adaptation step t, the executable AgentBetta configuration is
Xt = (Mt, Ct, Tt, Pt, Memt, Rt, τt, It) ,
(4)
where each element corresponds to a measurable configuration dimension. Table 2 summarizes the operational
interpretation of these dimensions. The representation is versioned so that every run can be reconstructed from its
recorded task specification, configuration, provider state, and adaptation history.
For a task q, configuration selection is expressed as a constrained optimization problem,
X⋆(q) = arg
min
X∈F(Π) J(X; q),
(5)
6


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
Table 2: Operational dimensions of the AgentBetta configuration.
Symbol
Dimension
Operational interpretation
M
Model capability
Provider/model identity, capability tier, reasoning or modality support, and inference parame-
ters that are under policy control.
C
Context
Model-visible task information, retrieved evidence, history, and admissible context budget.
T
Tools
Explicit set of callable tools or functions exposed to the agent for the current task.
P
Permissions
Authorized operations and resource scopes; permission expansion can request additional
authority but cannot grant it autonomously.
Mem
Memory
Working or persistent memory available to the task, together with retention and retrieval policy.
R
Resources
Token, compute, monetary, or other quantitative resource budgets not represented elsewhere.
τ
Execution bounds
Time, turn, retry, and other stopping limits.
I
Interaction limits
Bounds on communication, external interaction, or related execution controls when these are
applicable.
subject to
Pr(v = PASS | X, q) ≥θ,
(6)
Risk(X, q) ≤ρ,
(7)
Cost(X, q) ≤B,
(8)
where F(Π) is the set of configurations permitted by the immutable policy envelope Π, θ is the required success level,
ρ is a prescribed risk bound, and B is the available resource budget. The objective J is evaluated from measurable
quantities. A general form is
J(X; q) = λc eCmon + λleL + λx eEC + λt eET + λp eEP + λr eR + λa eA,
(9)
where the normalized terms denote monetary cost, latency, context exposure, tool exposure, permission exposure,
resource consumption, and adaptation overhead, respectively. The weights λ· and normalization rules are fixed before
evaluation on the held-out test set. Equation (5) is used as a decision framework rather than as an assumption that a
global optimum can be recovered from a finite number of executions.
2.3
Task characterization and initial configuration
AgentBetta first maps the task to a feature representation ϕ(q). Only information available before substantive execution
is used for this step; oracle labels or hidden test outcomes are excluded. The feature representation can include
task modality, input size, dependency cues, expected side-effect class, explicitly requested operations, available tool
requirements, privacy or local-only constraints, and coarse indicators of structural or reasoning complexity. Features
derived from environment inspection are restricted to low-cost probes permitted by Π.
The initial configuration is generated by
X0 = π0(ϕ(q), H) ,
(10)
where H is the accumulated configuration history. The reference implementation uses a deterministic initialization
policy when no admissible historical evidence is available. When history-informed initialization is enabled, completed
verified runs are indexed by a predeclared task-feature bucket, and configurations from compatible training/development
evidence are ranked by a recorded resource score. The lowest-scoring supported verified configuration is used as the
warm start; current task permissions remain authoritative, and write-gated tools are removed when the corresponding
authority is absent. If no compatible verified record is available, initialization falls back deterministically. Because a
stored successful configuration need not be minimal, history reuse is interpreted as a warm start rather than as proof
that X0 is the least-exposure feasible configuration. The basis for the selected X0 is recorded in the run metadata.
The initial policy is deliberately conservative with respect to authority. A predicted need for a privileged operation is
represented as a permission requirement or request; it is not interpreted as authorization. This separation is consistent
with task-scoped authorization principles in recent agent-security work [17] and prevents the adaptive controller from
turning capability prediction into an implicit privilege grant.
2.4
Execution state and verification
Execution proceeds as a sequence of model decisions, admissible tool calls, environment observations, and verification
checkpoints. The runtime state at step t is written as
st = (q, Xt, Ht, bt) ,
(11)
7


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
where Ht is the accumulated execution history and bt contains remaining resource and time budgets. The action policy
operates only over tools, context, and permissions exposed by Xt; capabilities that are absent from the configuration are
not silently made available during execution.
The verifier returns
V(st, yt) = (vt, zt) ,
(12)
where yt is the current task output, vt ∈{PASS, FAIL, INDETERMINATE} is the verification state, and zt is structured
diagnostic evidence. Verification is ordered by evidential strength. Deterministic environment checks, executable
tests, exact-match conditions, schema validation, and reproducible numerical checks are used when available. When
such evaluators are unavailable, a fixed external evaluator may be used under a predeclared protocol. In that case, the
evaluator is separated from the acting policy, is blinded to the identity of the adaptation condition where feasible, and
its prompt, model version, and sampling parameters are recorded. This design reduces the risk that the same model both
produces and uncritically validates its own output.
A failed verifier does not automatically imply inadequate model capability. For example, the cause may be unavailable
evidence, a missing tool, an authorization boundary, a resource limit, or an execution error. AgentBetta therefore
separates verification from insufficiency diagnosis.
2.5
Configuration-insufficiency diagnosis
When vt̸ = PASS, the diagnosis function
dt = g(ϕ(q), Xt, Ht, zt)
(13)
produces a ranked set of candidate deficiency labels with associated evidence. The diagnosis space is
D = {dM, dC, dT , dP , dMem, dR, dτ, dI, d∅},
(14)
where d∅denotes a non-configuration failure or an unresolved diagnosis. Operational signals include provider
errors, context retrieval failures, explicit missing-tool conditions, permission denials, memory discontinuity, resource
exhaustion, timeout or retry exhaustion, and verifier-specific evidence indicating that relevant information or capability
was unavailable.
The production diagnosis uses only evidence observable at runtime. Ground-truth deficiency labels, when constructed
for controlled experiments, are used solely to evaluate the accuracy of g and are not supplied to the acting agent.
The diagnosis output is stored as an AdaptationEvent containing the pre-adaptation configuration, evidence, selected
deficiency class or classes, confidence, proposed modification, and subsequent verification outcome. If no diagnosis
exceeds the predeclared confidence requirement, the event is labelled unresolved; AgentBetta may perform a bounded
diagnostic probe, apply a predeclared fallback policy, or terminate without claiming that a specific dimension was
deficient.
2.6
Dimension-selective configuration expansion
Given a diagnosed set Dt ⊆D \ {d∅}, the expansion operator produces
Xt+1 = Γ+
Dt(Xt),
(15)
subject to the requirement that dimensions not included in Dt remain unchanged unless a documented dependency
makes that impossible. For a single diagnosed dimension k, the intended update therefore satisfies
X(j)
t+1 = X(j)
t
∀j̸ = k,
(16)
while X(k)
t+1 is replaced by the next admissible capability level under the predeclared ordering for that dimension.
Examples include increasing model capability without adding tools, expanding evidence context without changing
permissions, adding one task-relevant tool without broad shell access, increasing an execution limit without changing
the model, or enabling additional memory only when state continuity is implicated.
Expansion after unsuccessful verification has clear precedent in complexity-aware execution strategies such as E3 [13].
AgentBetta differs methodologically by treating expansion as an operation over a heterogeneous configuration and by
recording which dimension was changed and why. The experiment therefore evaluates selective expansion against
broad or wholesale escalation rather than assuming that selective adaptation is beneficial.
Permission adaptation is handled differently from ordinary resource expansion. If dP is diagnosed, Γ+
Dt may generate
the narrowest permission request consistent with the failed operation, but the configuration does not acquire the
requested authority until an external policy mechanism authorizes it. Hard-denied operations are not escalatable.
Similarly, local-only or privacy restrictions cannot be relaxed by the adaptive policy. Resource bounds are treated as
explicit constraints, consistent with the broader principle of auditable resource-bounded agent execution [16].
8


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
2.7
Post-success counterfactual configuration contraction
A verified successful configuration establishes feasibility but does not establish that every allocated capability was
necessary. AgentBetta therefore includes a counterfactual contraction procedure for controlled benchmark and learning
settings. Let Xs denote a configuration for which vs = PASS. For an admissible dimension k, a one-step contraction
operator Γ−
k constructs
X−k
s
= Γ−
k (Xs),
(17)
where only dimension k is reduced according to its predefined partial order. Candidate operations include selecting a
lower-cost or lower-capability model, reducing active context, removing a tool, narrowing a permission set, reducing
memory, lowering token or compute budgets, or reducing time/turn limits.
Each candidate reduction is evaluated by re-executing the task under the reduced configuration whenever such replay is
safe and reproducible. For deterministic tasks, a single exact re-execution may be sufficient under the declared evaluator.
For stochastic model executions, nc repeated trials are conducted under a fixed sampling protocol; paired random seeds
are used when the provider exposes reproducible seeding. A contraction is retained only when the lower confidence
bound on its empirical success probability satisfies the predeclared success threshold,
LCB1−α(bpk) ≥θ,
(18)
and the reduced configuration satisfies all safety and budget constraints. The number of trials nc, confidence level 1 −α,
and threshold θ are fixed before test-set evaluation.
Accepted contractions are applied sequentially, with the task re-verified after every accepted change. The process stops
when no admissible one-step contraction passes the acceptance criterion, when the contraction budget is exhausted,
or when further replay is unsafe. The resulting configuration is described as an empirically contracted feasible
configuration; it is not claimed to be a global minimum because the configuration space may be non-convex, categorical,
stochastic, and only partially ordered. This terminology also distinguishes the procedure from workflow-level pruning
methods such as AgentSlimming [7], which motivates the need for direct comparison rather than an assumption of
methodological superiority.
Counterfactual contraction is never used to repeat irreversible or harmful real-world actions solely for experimental
purposes. Such experiments are restricted to deterministic fixtures, sandboxes, simulations, replayable repositories, or
other controlled environments. For live tasks, AgentBetta may record a contraction hypothesis, but it does not label a
reduced configuration as sufficient unless the stated validation protocol has actually been satisfied.
2.8
Learning the verified configuration frontier
Every completed execution contributes a record
ri = (ϕ(qi), Xi, Ai, vi, mi) ,
(19)
where Ai is the ordered adaptation history and mi contains measured cost, latency, context exposure, tool exposure,
permission exposure, and resource use. Successful and unsuccessful contraction trials are both retained. Excluding
failed contraction attempts would bias the estimated frontier toward configurations that appear artificially efficient.
For a task family or neighbourhood in feature space, the empirical feasible set contains configurations that satisfy the
verification requirement under the declared protocol. A configuration Xa dominates Xb only when it is no worse on
all prespecified optimization criteria and strictly better on at least one criterion while meeting the same success and
safety constraints. The nondominated set defines an empirical verified configuration frontier. This frontier is used to
warm-start future tasks but is not treated as proof of universal optimality.
The implemented history layer is case based and deliberately conservative. A new task is mapped to the same predeclared
feature representation used by the initialization policy, and only verified records from permitted data splits are eligible
for reuse. Within a compatible feature bucket, the initializer selects the verified configuration with the lowest recorded
resource score; when no eligible record exists, it returns to the deterministic initialization policy. Current authority is
re-applied after retrieval, so historical permission state cannot widen the task’s present authorization. This mechanism
estimates an empirical warm start, not a minimal configuration. In particular, if the frontier contains only successful but
relatively large configurations, history can reduce the number of adaptation steps without reducing initial capability
exposure.
2.9
Adaptation-cost control
Diagnosis, re-execution, verification, and contraction consume resources. AgentBetta therefore distinguishes ordinary
task-execution cost from the additional cost of collecting adaptation evidence. In benchmark mode, contraction follows
9


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
Figure 2: Verification-driven adaptive control flow in AgentBetta. A task is characterized and assigned an initial config-
uration before execution and runtime verification. Unsuccessful or indeterminate verification triggers configuration-
deficiency diagnosis; only policy-admissible diagnosed dimensions may be expanded. Verified configurations may
undergo controlled counterfactual contraction in replayable settings, after which accepted evidence is recorded for
subsequent history-informed initialization.
a fixed experimental budget so that acceptance and rejection events can be compared consistently. For deployment,
a natural decision criterion is to perform optional contraction only when its expected amortized benefit exceeds its
estimated cost,
b
Nreuse d
∆Jfuture > bCcf + δ,
(20)
where b
Nreuse is the estimated number of future uses for the relevant task neighbourhood, d
∆Jfuture is the expected
reduction in objective value per reuse, bCcf is the estimated cost of the counterfactual experiment, and δ is a non-negative
safety margin. Equation (20) is a deployment decision criterion rather than an empirically established benefit in the
reported benchmark campaign; the reported experiments account for adaptation activity separately and do not infer net
efficiency from in-process fixture timing.
2.10
Integrated control algorithm
Figure 2 summarizes the runtime logic, and Algorithm 1 provides the corresponding control procedure. The acting
model is never allowed to modify the hard policy envelope, verification definition, or experimental acceptance thresholds
during a run.
10


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
Algorithm 1 Verification-driven adaptive configuration in AgentBetta
Require: Task q, policy envelope Π, history H, run budget B
1: ϕ ←CHARACTERIZE(q)
2: X ←π0(ϕ, H)
3: VALIDATEPOLICY(X, Π)
4: while run budget and stopping conditions permit do
5:
(y, H, m) ←EXECUTE(q, X)
6:
(v, z) ←V(q, X, y, H)
7:
RECORDRUNSTATE(q, X, H, m, v, z)
8:
if v = PASS then
9:
if CONTRACTIONELIGIBLE(q, X, m, Π) then
10:
(Xc, Rc) ←COUNTERFACTUALCONTRACT(q, X, V, Π)
11:
UPDATEHISTORY(H, q, Xc, Rc)
12:
else
13:
UPDATEHISTORY(H, q, X, v, m)
14:
end if
15:
return verified result
16:
end if
17:
D ←DIAGNOSE(q, X, H, z)
18:
if D is unresolved or no safe admissible expansion exists then
19:
return unsuccessful/blocked result with recorded evidence
20:
end if
21:
X′ ←SELECTIVEEXPAND(X, D, Π)
22:
RECORDADAPTATION(X, D, X′, z)
23:
X ←X′
24: end while
25: return limit-exhausted result with complete run record
2.11
Safety, authorization, and reproducibility constraints
The adaptive controller operates inside a non-adaptive safety envelope. User restrictions, hard-denied capabilities,
workspace boundaries, credential protections, and local-only requirements are evaluated outside the language model and
cannot be relaxed by model output. Permission state Pt therefore represents granted authority, not the set of operations
the model would prefer to perform. A proposed permission expansion creates a bounded request and remains ineffective
unless the external authorization mechanism accepts it. This separation is important because task-specific authorization
is itself an established security problem [17]; AgentBetta does not treat authorization enforcement as an emergent
property of language-model reasoning.
For reproducibility, each run records the AgentBetta version and source revision; task identifier and task features;
complete configuration sequence X0, . . . , XT ; provider and model identifiers; model parameters; tool and permission
sets; input and output token counts when available; monetary cost where reliably measurable; wall-clock latency; tool
invocations; verifier outputs; diagnosis evidence; adaptation events; stopping reason; and hashes of relevant artifacts
when appropriate. Contraction trials are stored as first-class experimental observations, including failed trials. Random
seeds are fixed when supported, and stochastic conditions are repeated according to the prespecified evaluation protocol.
The implementation exposes component controls for task-conditioned initialization, deficiency diagnosis, counterfactual
contraction, and history-informed initialization; selective expansion is evaluated through controlled comparison with
scope-only and wholesale expansion policies. These controls allow the empirical study to attribute observed changes to
specific mechanisms rather than to a stronger underlying model, a larger tool set, or broader permissions. Adaptation
overhead is recorded separately; the amortization criterion in Equation (20) is not treated as an experimentally validated
gain unless it is explicitly activated and measured. The external evaluation further compares AgentBetta with fixed
configurations and reasoning-, collaboration-, and specialization-oriented baselines under matched model, tool, verifier,
and task conditions wherever technically feasible. Quantitative claims are made only from the frozen implementation
and recorded experimental outputs.
2.12
Experimental design and statistical analysis
The empirical study was divided into a controlled mechanism-validation layer and an external model-facing layer. The
primary experiments were executed on a Mac Studio (Apple M2 Max, 32 GB unified memory) running macOS 26.5.2.
11


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
The external-evaluation environment used Python 3.13.9 and AgentBetta 0.2.0.dev0; repository-level SWE-bench
reproduction used Python 3.11 for compatibility with the historical software environments represented by the selected
instances. Run records preserve the source revision, benchmark and task identifiers, model and provider identifiers,
budgets, verifier fingerprints, repetition index, resource measurements, and stopping status. The AgentBetta source
code is publicly available at https://github.com/ashraful388/AgentBetta. For reproducibility, the software
version associated with the experiments reported in this study is identified by its corresponding release tag and commit
hash [21].
Controlled benchmark.
AB-ConfigBench v1 contains 245 deterministic tasks. The benchmark includes 25 tasks
targeting each of the eight configuration dimensions in Eq. (4), together with 15 already-sufficient tasks and 10 tasks
each in mixed-deficiency, impossible, and hard-denied categories. Each task stores a minimum admissible configuration
and a ground-truth set of deficient dimensions; these labels are withheld from the acting policy and are used only for
evaluation. A frozen positional split assigns 147 tasks to training, 40 to development, and 58 to the held-out test set. The
headline held-out comparison in Table 3 uses the 58 test tasks. Broader mechanism analyses, including diagnosis and
counterfactual-probe statistics, report their own denominators explicitly and are not interpreted as additional held-out
test accuracy. Because the configuration-aware fixture provider is deterministic, this layer measures controller behavior
rather than stochastic language-model performance.
External benchmarks and baselines.
The principal external backbone was qwen3.8-flash, accessed through a
fixed OpenAI-compatible model client with temperature 0. The same model client, native task tools, verifier, and
benchmark-specific ceiling were supplied to all methods within a comparison. The core panel compared Fixed
Lean, Fixed Full, matched ReAct, matched Reflexion, and AgentBetta. A separate 64-task BFCL subset compared
AgentBetta with AutoGen 0.7.5 and CrewAI 1.15.21 using their published runtime abstractions. The coding pilot used
SWE-agent 1.1.0. Cross-family replication used llama3.1:8b (Q4_K_M, on-device through Ollama) on a 16-task
BFCL subset. These comparisons evaluate the implemented configurations under matched experimental conditions
and should not be interpreted as exhaustive evaluations of the respective frameworks or their broader configuration
spaces. The external data comprised BFCL v4 function-calling tasks, a 40-task text-only GAIA validation panel
restricted to Levels 1–2, and eight screened SWE-bench Verified instances. The SWE-bench experiment used a declared
local-checkout reproduction rather than the official Docker leaderboard harness; consequently, its results support only
the within-study agent comparison. The BFCL core panel contained 191 shared tasks with three intended repetitions
per method, and the AutoGen/CrewAI framework subset contained 64 tasks with three complete repetitions. GAIA
used 40 tasks with three intended repetitions. The SWE-bench pilot used eight instances with two repetitions, and the
cross-family BFCL panel used 16 tasks with three repetitions. Task selection and bootstrap sampling used the fixed
seed 20260914. Benchmark-specific ceilings were shared within each comparison: BFCL allowed at most four model
calls, eight tool calls, 24,000 context characters, and 600 output tokens per call; GAIA allowed 16 model calls, 24 tool
calls, 64,000 context characters, and 1,200 output tokens per call; SWE-bench used a hard 40-model-call ceiling, 60
tool calls, 200,000 context characters, and 1,500 output tokens per call. The local cross-family BFCL panel used an
eight-call ceiling, 12 tool calls, 32,000 context characters, and 512 output tokens per call.
Scoring and statistical analysis.
BFCL function emissions were scored with the benchmark function-call checker;
GAIA answers were evaluated under a fixed judge protocol; and SWE-bench success required the designated
FAIL_TO_PASS tests to pass without regression of baseline-valid PASS_TO_PASS tests. For repeated external panels,
the primary unit of analysis was the task. Scoreable repetitions were first averaged within each task for both success
and continuous resource measurements, after which paired comparisons were formed on shared task identifiers. Pooled
run-level success is reported only as a descriptive quantity. Provider or infrastructure failures that prevented scoring
were excluded from the primary success denominator and are reported separately rather than imputed as task failures.
Binary paired comparisons used exact McNemar tests where applicable. Confidence intervals for paired task-level
differences and continuous resource effects used a paired percentile bootstrap with 5,000 resamples and seed 20260914.
Holm–Bonferroni correction was applied only to the predeclared confirmatory family comprising AgentBetta versus
matched ReAct on BFCL, Reflexion on GAIA, the evaluated AutoGen and CrewAI configurations on the matched
BFCL subset, and SWE-agent on the coding pilot. Non-significance is not interpreted as equivalence. Wall-clock
latency is reported descriptively but is excluded from the principal efficiency claims because provider retry and network
behavior were not uniformly bounded across methods.
12


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
Table 3: Held-out AB-ConfigBench performance under the deterministic configuration-aware provider. The experiment
isolates controller behavior and is not a general LLM comparison.
Method
Verified success (%)
Median context
Median tools
Median adaptations
AgentBetta Full
91.38
8,000
0
1.0
Fixed Full
93.10
64,000
5
0.0
Wholesale Escalation
93.10
64,000
5
1.0
Fixed Lean
6.90
8,000
0
0.0
AgentBetta −Diagnosis
15.52
8,000
0
0.0
AgentBetta −Contraction
91.38
8,000
0
1.0
AgentBetta −History
91.38
8,000
0
1.0
3
Results
3.1
Evaluation scope and reporting convention
The evaluation follows the two-layer design and statistical protocol defined in Section 2.12. The controlled AB-
ConfigBench layer isolates configuration diagnosis, selective expansion, verification, contraction, and history reuse
with a deterministic configuration-aware provider; it is therefore interpreted as mechanism validation rather than as a
measure of general language-model capability. The external layer uses real model inference on BFCL [22], a text-only
GAIA panel [23], and a screened SWE-bench Verified pilot [24], with matched reasoning-, reflection-, collaboration-,
and specialization-oriented baselines. Primary repeated-panel comparisons use task-level repetition aggregates, while
pooled run-level values are retained only as descriptive quantities. Unless otherwise specified, success throughout the
evaluation refers to verifier-confirmed task completion under the declared benchmark-specific evaluation protocol.
3.2
Controlled performance under task-conditioned configuration
Table 3 reports the held-out AB-ConfigBench test results. AgentBetta Full verified 91.38% of the 58 tasks, compared
with 93.10% for Fixed Full and Wholesale Escalation. The small difference in verified success was accompanied by a
substantial difference in provisioned capability. AgentBetta retained a median context allocation of 8,000 and a median
tool exposure of zero, whereas Fixed Full and Wholesale Escalation used 64,000 context units and five exposed tools.
Fixed Lean reached only 6.90%, and removal of diagnosis reduced AgentBetta to 15.52%. By contrast, removing
contraction or history did not change the held-out success rate. The controlled results therefore indicate that the main
success contribution arises from failure-side diagnosis and adaptation, while contraction and history primarily affect
post-success exposure and search effort.
Across the broader controlled campaign, the same pattern remained evident. Removing diagnosis reduced verified
success from 89.67% to 14.15%, a decrease of 75.61 percentage points, with Holm-adjusted p < 10−45. Removing
contraction or history changed success by only 0.09 percentage points and was not statistically distinguishable from
the full method. Fixed Full and Wholesale Escalation did not show a statistically reliable success advantage over
AgentBetta in the campaign-level paired analysis. These results separate the function of the components: diagnosis
supports recovery before success, whereas contraction and history operate on the configuration search after or across
successful runs.
3.3
Configuration-deficiency diagnosis
Configuration-deficiency diagnosis achieved macro-F1 0.819, micro-F1 0.800, exact-set accuracy 0.689, and Hamming
loss 0.047. Precision was 1.000 for every configuration dimension (Table 4), so no evaluated diagnosis expanded a
dimension absent from the ground-truth deficient set. The remaining errors were false negatives. Recall was highest
for interaction limits (0.846), execution limits (0.840), and resources (0.818), and lowest for tools (0.354). The tool
result was associated with deliberately retained tasks in which the required tool need was not inferable from the task
information available to the controller. The diagnosis heatmap in Fig. 3 provides the corresponding distribution of
predicted deficiencies.
3.4
Selective expansion versus wholesale escalation
The effect of diagnosis on configuration change is summarized in Table 5. Among initially failed tasks, AgentBetta
recovered 89.0% with a median of one changed dimension per adaptation and an unrelated-dimension change rate
of 0.000. Scope-only expansion produced a similar recovery rate and the same narrow change pattern. Wholesale
13


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
Table 4: Per-dimension configuration-deficiency diagnosis in the controlled campaign.
Dimension
Support
Precision
Recall
F1
Model
218
1.000
0.716
0.834
Context
161
1.000
0.752
0.858
Tools
322
1.000
0.354
0.523
Permissions
187
1.000
0.610
0.758
Memory
142
1.000
0.739
0.850
Resources
154
1.000
0.818
0.900
Execution limits
156
1.000
0.840
0.913
Interaction limits
149
1.000
0.846
0.916
Macro average
–
1.000
–
0.819
Table 5: Recovery after initial failure under selective and wholesale adaptation.
Method
Initially failed
Recovery (%)
Mean adaptations per initially failed task
Median dimensions changed
Unrelated-change rate
Added context
AgentBetta Full
482
89.00
0.814
1
0.000
0
Scope-only Expansion
192
89.06
0.947
1
0.000
0
Wholesale Escalation
192
91.67
0.909
8
0.733
56,000
Escalation recovered 91.67%, but changed all eight configuration dimensions at the median, produced an unrelated-
dimension change rate of 0.733, added 56,000 context units, and exposed five additional tools. Figure 4 illustrates the
corresponding exposure profiles. The controlled advantage of selective expansion is therefore narrower intervention,
rather than a higher maximum success rate.
3.5
Verification-gated counterfactual contraction and history reuse
Counterfactual contraction was applied only after verified success. Across 894 eligible successful parent runs, 2,393
one-dimension probes were executed; 1,350 retained verification and 1,043 failed, giving an overall acceptance rate of
56.41%. The outcome was dimension dependent (Table 6). Model reduction was accepted in 88.70% of 1,566 probes,
context reduction in 65.55% of 357 probes, and tool reduction in 50.00% of 156 probes. The evaluated probes did
not accept reductions of memory, resource budget, execution limits, or interaction limits. No permission probe was
represented in the contraction table; permission behavior was assessed separately by the safety tests. Figure 5 presents
the acceptance profile by dimension.
History-informed initialization produced a narrower effect than diagnosis. On 147 training tasks, both cold and history-
informed AgentBetta conditions verified 131 tasks. Median adaptations decreased from 1 to 0 and mean attempts
decreased from 1.88 to 1.56, whereas median starting context remained 8,000 and median starting tool exposure
remained zero. In the present implementation, history therefore reduced repeated search but did not reduce initial
exposure or improve task success. This negative result is consistent with the stored evidence: the initializer retrieves
previously verified configurations, which establish sufficiency but do not by themselves establish that a smaller starting
configuration would also have succeeded.
3.6
External comparative results
Table 7 summarizes the task-level comparisons. The external results do not support a single ordering across task
classes. AgentBetta exceeded matched ReAct on BFCL, but required more inference. It achieved higher verified success
than the evaluated AutoGen and CrewAI configurations on the complete BFCL framework subset while using fewer
tokens and model calls. The GAIA difference relative to Reflexion was unresolved and the repeated panel remained
incomplete. The SWE-bench pilot showed a substantially higher observed task-resolution rate for SWE-agent, although
the Holm-adjusted test did not meet the conventional 0.05 threshold. On an additional local model family, all four tested
controllers reached the same accuracy on the small cross-family subset.
3.6.1
Matched ReAct comparison on BFCL
BFCL evaluates an LLM’s ability to select and emit valid function calls under a range of tool-use conditions [22]. The
matched ReAct comparison [1] used 191 shared tasks with three intended repetitions. ReAct completed all 191 tasks
with three scoreable repetitions. AgentBetta had complete three-repetition coverage on 178 tasks; 23 repetitions were
excluded because provider failures could not be recovered under the frozen provider condition. Table 8 reports the
repeated-panel coverage and resource summary. AgentBetta achieved 87.35% task-level verified success and ReAct
14


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
Figure 3: Distribution of true and predicted configuration deficiencies in the controlled campaign. The diagonal
concentration is consistent with the high precision reported in Table 4; residual error is dominated by missed rather than
spurious deficiencies.
Table 6: Counterfactual contraction outcomes by configuration dimension.
Dimension
Probes attempted
Probes passed
Acceptance (%)
Model
1,566
1,389
88.70
Context
357
234
65.55
Tools
156
78
50.00
Memory
15
0
0.00
Resources
103
0
0.00
Execution limits
103
0
0.00
Interaction limits
93
0
0.00
All evaluated probes
2,393
1,350
56.41
83.94%, giving a difference of +3.40 percentage points (95% CI [+0.09, +6.89]; raw p = 0.0034; Holm-adjusted
p = 0.0103). Figure 6 reports the success estimates and coverage-aware intervals.
The success improvement was accompanied by greater inference expenditure. After the repeated-measures correction,
AgentBetta used 16.85% more tokens, 20.24% more model calls, and 18.08% higher model cost than ReAct. Task-level
context and tool exposure did not differ reliably. Figure 7 therefore represents the BFCL result as a success–expenditure
trade-off rather than as a joint accuracy-and-efficiency improvement.
15


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
Figure 4: Median context, tool, and permission exposure for AgentBetta, scope-only expansion, and wholesale
escalation. Wholesale escalation increases dimensions unrelated to the diagnosed deficiency, whereas the selective
methods retain the lean exposure profile for dimensions that do not require expansion.
Table 7: Summary of external comparisons. Resource effects are AgentBetta relative to the comparator and are
computed from task-level repetition aggregates. “Adj. p” denotes the Holm-adjusted significance level within the
predeclared confirmatory family.
Comparator
Benchmark
AgentBetta (%)
Comparator (%)
Difference (pp)
95% CI (pp)
Adj. p
Principal resource effect
ReAct
BFCL
87.35
83.94
+3.40
[+0.09, +6.89]
0.0103
tokens +16.9%; calls +20.2%; cost +18.1%
Reflexion
GAIA
27.19
31.58
−4.39
[−15.35, +5.70]
0.4531
tokens −41.0%; calls −31.1%; cost −48.9%
AutoGen
BFCL subset
88.02
31.77
+56.25
[+45.3, +66.7]
5.8 × 10−11
tokens −66.4%; calls −53.0%; cost −70.5%
CrewAI
BFCL subset
88.02
13.54
+74.48
[+65.1, +83.3]
8.9 × 10−15
tokens −77.0%; calls −67.7%; cost −81.2%
SWE-agent
SWE-bench pilot
6.25
75.00
−68.75
[−93.8, −37.5]
0.0625
tokens −79.4%; calls −35.2%; cost −76.4%
Fixed Full
Cross-family BFCL
31.25
31.25
0.00
[0.0, 0.0]
–
context −75.0%; tokens +134.9%
3.6.2
Evaluated AutoGen and CrewAI configurations
The multi-agent comparison used a frozen 64-task BFCL subset with three complete repetitions for each method.
AutoGen provides conversational multi-agent orchestration [25], whereas CrewAI provides role-based agent and
workflow abstractions [26]. Under the evaluated configurations, AgentBetta reached 88.02% verified success, compared
with 31.77% for AutoGen and 13.54% for CrewAI. The absolute differences were +56.25 and +74.48 percentage
points, respectively, and both remained significant after Holm correction (Table 7).
The comparison also favored AgentBetta on inference expenditure. Relative to AutoGen, AgentBetta used 66.38% fewer
tokens, 52.99% fewer model calls, and 70.47% lower model cost. Relative to CrewAI, the corresponding reductions
were 76.95%, 67.68%, and 81.19%. Figure 8 summarizes the success and inference profiles. These values characterize
16


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
Figure 5: Acceptance rate of verification-gated counterfactual contraction by configuration dimension. A contraction is
accepted only when re-execution under the reduced configuration remains verified.
Table 8: Repeated BFCL comparison with matched ReAct. Success and resource values are task-level repetition
aggregates; pooled run-level success is included only as a descriptive quantity.
Method
Scoreable runs
Excluded runs
Tasks complete 3/3
Task-level success (%)
Pooled success (%)
Mean tokens/task
Mean calls/task
Mean cost/task (USD)
AgentBetta
550
23
178/191
87.35
88.00
1,075
1.20
0.000262
ReAct Matched
573
0
191/191
83.94
83.94
920
1.00
0.000222
the tested framework configurations on the common BFCL subset; they do not constitute a framework-wide ranking
independent of orchestration design, task decomposition, or model choice.
3.6.3
Reflexion comparison on GAIA
GAIA evaluates general-assistant tasks requiring combinations of reasoning, information access, and tool use [23].
The text-only comparison with Reflexion [3] used a 40-task panel with three intended repetitions. AgentBetta had 115
scoreable runs and complete 3/3 coverage on 37 tasks; Reflexion had 65 scoreable runs and complete coverage on 11
tasks. Fifty-five Reflexion repetitions and five AgentBetta repetitions were unscorable. The unrecovered Reflexion set
included provider failures and runs in which the shared model-call allowance was exhausted before the evaluation judge
completed scoring. The missing repetitions could not be rerun under the identical frozen provider configuration; they
were therefore retained as unscored rather than reproduced under a different provider condition.
On the tasks with scoreable data for both methods, AgentBetta achieved 27.19% task-level verified success and Reflexion
31.58%, a difference of −4.39 percentage points (95% CI [−15.35, +5.70]; raw and Holm-adjusted p = 0.4531).
The interval crosses zero, so the success difference is unresolved. AgentBetta used 41.01% fewer tokens, 31.06%
17


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
Figure 6: Task-level verified success for AgentBetta and matched ReAct on the repeated BFCL panel. AgentBetta’s
incomplete repetition coverage is reported explicitly rather than imputed.
Table 9: GAIA comparison between AgentBetta and Reflexion. The repeated panel remains incomplete because
frozen-provider recovery was unavailable; the result is therefore interpreted as exploratory.
Method
Scoreable runs
Excluded runs
Tasks complete 3/3
Task-level success (%)
Pooled success (%)
Mean tokens/task
Mean calls/task
Mean cost/task (USD)
AgentBetta
115
5
37/40
27.19
26.96
9,364
4.47
0.003189
Reflexion
65
55
11/40
31.58
38.46
15,874
6.48
0.006243
fewer model calls, and 48.92% lower model cost. Context exposure was 5.26% higher and not statistically reliable;
tool exposure did not differ. Table 9 and Fig. 9 therefore support an exploratory accuracy–resource trade-off, not a
performance ranking.
3.6.4
Specialized coding-agent comparison
The coding pilot used eight screened SWE-bench Verified instances [24], with two repetitions and a hard model-call
ceiling. SWE-agent, whose agent–computer interface is designed specifically for repository navigation, editing, and test
execution [27], solved 75.00% of the evaluated runs. AgentBetta solved 6.25% and matched ReAct solved 0%. The
AgentBetta–SWE-agent difference was −68.75 percentage points with a 95% interval of approximately [−93.8, −37.5]
percentage points. The raw paired significance level was 0.0312, but the Holm-adjusted value was 0.0625. The observed
difference is therefore large, but the small pilot does not establish confirmatory significance after multiplicity correction.
AgentBetta used 79.38% fewer tokens, 35.16% fewer model calls, 76.41% lower model cost, and 88.00% less configured
context than SWE-agent, yet this lower expenditure coincided with substantially lower task resolution. Figure 10
makes this asymmetry explicit. The pilot supports the continued value of domain-specific execution scaffolding for
repository-scale software engineering.
3.6.5
Cross-family replication
A 16-task stratified BFCL subset was repeated on an additional local model family. AgentBetta, Fixed Full, matched
ReAct, and Reflexion each achieved 31.25% verified success. The accuracy ordering observed with the primary
backbone therefore did not reproduce on this additional family. AgentBetta used less configured context than Fixed Full
but more tokens and model calls than ReAct; it used fewer tokens and calls than Reflexion. Figure 11 summarizes these
18


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
Figure 7: BFCL success and task-level inference expenditure for AgentBetta and matched ReAct. AgentBetta attains
higher verified success in this panel but uses more tokens and model calls.
results. The experiment supports portability of the runtime and configuration protocol, but it does not support a claim of
model-independent performance superiority.
3.7
Safety and permission behavior
The controlled campaign recorded zero unauthorized permission activations and zero successful hard-denied operations.
The verifier also rejected adversarial model text when structured execution evidence indicated failure, and history-based
initialization was unable to widen the current task’s authority envelope. These checks establish that capability prediction
and authorization were separated in the evaluated implementation.
The safety result must nevertheless be interpreted at the correct level. In the external comparison, all methods executed
through a shared enforcement boundary. Consequently, zero successful hard-denied dispatches are evidence for
the common permission layer rather than for AgentBetta alone. AgentBetta-specific evidence concerns the explicit
representation of permission as a configuration dimension, the requirement that expansion remain inside the eligible
authority set, and the ability to test whether capability can be reduced after verification.
3.8
Results synthesis
The controlled experiments support three mechanism-level conclusions. First, diagnosis is the principal component
responsible for recovering from insufficient initial configurations. Second, selective adaptation can preserve most of
the recovery obtained by wholesale escalation while avoiding unrelated changes to the configuration vector. Third,
counterfactual contraction can remove capability after success in a substantial fraction of the evaluated probes, although
its effect is on verified exposure rather than on task success. History reuse reduces repeated adaptation work but does
not yet compress the starting configuration.
The external comparisons provide a more conditional result. AgentBetta achieved a modest, statistically supported
BFCL success increase over matched ReAct but used more inference. It achieved higher verified success than the
evaluated AutoGen and CrewAI configurations on a complete BFCL subset while consuming fewer tokens, model calls,
and cost. The GAIA comparison with Reflexion remained unresolved and incomplete. The SWE-bench pilot favored the
specialized SWE-agent in observed task resolution, and the cross-family panel did not reproduce the primary-backbone
19


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
Figure 8: Verified success and inference overhead for AgentBetta and the evaluated AutoGen and CrewAI configurations
on the complete 64-task BFCL framework subset.
accuracy ordering. Collectively, these results support AgentBetta as a task-conditioned capability-configuration
controller rather than as a universally dominant agent architecture.
4
Discussion
4.1
Configuration adaptation as a runtime control problem
The controlled results indicate that treating configuration as a runtime variable can improve capability allocation under
the evaluated conditions. A lean fixed configuration fails when the task requires capability outside its initial envelope,
whereas a full fixed configuration avoids those failures by provisioning the maximum tested capability irrespective of
task need. AgentBetta instead uses an adaptive configuration regime that begins from a bounded configuration, diagnoses
insufficiency from execution and verification evidence, and modifies only the relevant dimensions. Accordingly, the
contribution is not the assumption that smaller configurations are inherently preferable, but the mechanism for adapting
capability according to task evidence as execution proceeds.
This interpretation should be distinguished from broader claims of adaptive agent configuration. Recent systems
have explored query-conditioned configuration, complexity-aware execution, and dynamic sub-agent orchestration
[8, 9, 13]. The present results do not support novelty for adaptation in the broad sense. They support the narrower
mechanism studied here: diagnosis of deficient coordinates in a heterogeneous configuration vector, selective expansion
constrained by an authority envelope, verification of the resulting execution, and post-success testing of whether
individual coordinates can be reduced.
4.2
Why diagnosis dominates the observed success effect
The ablation results identify diagnosis as the component most directly associated with successful recovery. The macro-
F1 score of 0.819 is particularly informative when considered together with a precision of 1.000 across all evaluated
dimensions: the controller rarely broadens the configuration without evidence for the corresponding deficiency. When
diagnosis is removed, the adaptive loop loses the mechanism that maps failure evidence to a specific intervention and
verified success falls to the level of non-adaptive query-conditioned execution. The selective-expansion experiment
20


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
Figure 9: Task-level GAIA success and resource expenditure for AgentBetta and Reflexion. The figure is descriptive
because the repeated panel is incomplete, particularly for Reflexion.
provides a second view of the same mechanism: similar recovery is obtained with one changed dimension rather than
eight.
The lower tool recall also defines an empirical boundary. A controller cannot reliably diagnose a requirement that
is absent from both the task representation and the available execution evidence. This limitation does not justify
indiscriminate pre-emptive expansion; rather, it indicates that diagnosis accuracy depends on observable evidence. In
deployment, richer tool descriptions, structured failure signals, or explicit uncertainty about hidden requirements are
likely to be more productive than indiscriminate escalation.
4.3
Counterfactual contraction serves a different objective from recovery
Contraction did not materially increase verified task success, and it should not be presented as a success mechanism.
Its role begins after successful execution. Overall, 56.41% of the evaluated single-dimension contraction probes
preserved verification, indicating that removable capability was present in some successful configurations under the
tested conditions. Model, context, and tool reductions were accepted at different rates, indicating that redundant capacity
is not distributed uniformly across configuration dimensions.
This function is related to recent work on reducing or adapting agent workflows after execution, including AgentSlim-
ming and counterfactual harness adaptation [7, 19]. The distinction relevant to AgentBetta is the object being tested:
each probe alters a coordinate of the heterogeneous execution configuration and is accepted only after re-execution
remains verified. The present method does not establish a globally minimal configuration. Because probes are local and
largely dimension-wise, interaction effects between coordinates may remain undiscovered. The appropriate claim is
verified empirical reduction, not global optimality.
4.4
History currently reduces search rather than initial exposure
The history experiment yielded no improvement in verified success or initial capability exposure, although it reduced
repeated adaptation effort. Reusing prior verified configurations reduced median adaptations from 1 to 0 and mean
attempts from 1.88 to 1.56. This outcome is explained by the evidence available to the initializer. A previously
21


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
Figure 10: Observed success and execution consumption in the eight-instance SWE-bench pilot. The specialized
SWE-agent configuration achieved substantially higher task resolution, while AgentBetta consumed fewer inference
resources.
successful configuration proves sufficiency; unless the historical record also contains evidence that smaller alternatives
were verified, it provides no basis for starting smaller.
A more informative history mechanism would therefore combine successful configurations with the outcomes of
contraction probes. Accepted reductions identify configurations known to remain sufficient after capability removal,
while failed reductions identify lower bounds for specific task families. Learning from both directions could turn history
from a search shortcut into a source of empirically supported initialization policies. This remains a testable extension
rather than a result of the current implementation.
4.5
External comparisons reveal task-dependent trade-offs
The BFCL comparison demonstrates that configuration adaptation can improve verified function-calling performance
without necessarily reducing inference. AgentBetta’s 3.40 percentage-point advantage over matched ReAct was
statistically supported, but it required more tokens and model calls. ReAct modifies the reasoning–action trajectory [1];
AgentBetta modifies the capability envelope within which that trajectory is executed. The evaluated BFCL result is
therefore consistent with complementary intervention points rather than with a general replacement relationship.
The GAIA comparison leads to a different conclusion. Reflexion explicitly uses verbal reinforcement and reflective
retry [3]; AgentBetta used substantially fewer resources on the paired scoreable tasks, but the success difference was
unresolved and the repetition coverage was incomplete. For tasks dominated by reasoning revision rather than by
missing capability, reflection may be more consequential than configuration change. The current GAIA evidence is
insufficient to rank the two approaches and is retained as an exploratory trade-off until the frozen missing runs can be
recovered.
The multi-agent comparison provides clearer evidence within the evaluated experimental scope. On the complete BFCL
subset, the evaluated AutoGen and CrewAI configurations consumed more inference while obtaining lower verified
success. Multi-agent systems are designed to support coordination, role specialization, and decomposition [25, 26];
BFCL does not require all of those properties. The result therefore supports a limited conclusion: when a task can be
solved within a single execution path, a dynamically configured single agent can avoid coordination overhead that is
22


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
Figure 11: Cross-family BFCL replication on the 16-task stratified subset. All four controllers reached the same verified
success, so the main-backbone accuracy ordering did not replicate.
unnecessary for that task. It does not establish that multi-agent collaboration is inferior on problems that genuinely
benefit from distributed roles or parallel decomposition.
4.6
Specialized procedural scaffolding remains necessary
The SWE-bench pilot shows that adaptive configuration does not substitute for domain-specific execution scaffolding.
SWE-agent was designed around an agent–computer interface specialized for software engineering [27]; its substantially
higher observed task resolution indicates that selecting resources and permissions is not equivalent to supplying domain-
specific procedures for codebase navigation, editing, test execution, and patch refinement. AgentBetta consumed fewer
resources, but the resulting economy did not compensate for the task-performance gap.
This observation suggests a practical extension of the configuration view. A specialized executor can itself be treated as
a selectable capability. AgentBetta need not reproduce every procedural strategy internally; instead, the configuration
controller could route a task to a coding-specific, research-specific, or other specialized executor when the diagnosed
task structure requires it. Such a design would preserve task-conditioned capability allocation while acknowledging that
configuration control and domain expertise address different sources of failure.
4.7
Model dependence limits general performance claims
The cross-family experiment did not reproduce the primary-backbone ranking: all tested controllers reached 31.25% on
the 16-task subset. This result constrains any claim that an adaptive controller will improve accuracy independently
of the underlying model. Configuration determines what capability is made available; it does not create reasoning or
function-calling competence that the backbone lacks. A controller can therefore reduce avoidable exposure or allocate
resources more appropriately while still failing to change the dominant error source.
The current evidence supports portability of the runtime mechanism across model families, not invariant performance
gain. A stronger generalization claim would require larger matched panels across independent providers and model
families, with the same task identifiers, tool definitions, verifier, and resource ceilings. Until such evidence is available,
performance claims should remain conditional on the tested model and benchmark configuration.
23


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
4.8
Safety implications of bounded capability expansion
Treating permission as an explicit configuration dimension creates a useful separation between predicted need and
granted authority. The controller may infer that an operation would help complete a task, but the requested expansion
remains bounded by the externally defined eligible set. This property is consistent with least-authority execution and
prevents history-based initialization from silently granting broader rights than the current policy permits.
The evaluation does not establish a complete security guarantee. The shared enforcement layer prevented prohibited
dispatches for all compared agents, so those outcomes cannot be attributed uniquely to AgentBetta. The agent-specific
contribution is the explicit inclusion of authority in configuration selection and adaptation, together with the ability
to retain or reduce authority based on task evidence. Adversarial evaluation with more complex tool chains, indirect
prompt injection, and persistent cross-task state remains necessary before stronger security claims can be made.
4.9
Threats to validity
Several limitations bound the interpretation of the results. First, AB-ConfigBench couples task requirements to a
deterministic configuration-aware provider. This is appropriate for isolating controller behavior, but absolute success
in that layer should not be interpreted as general language-model performance. The external evaluation was included
specifically to test whether the mechanism remains meaningful under model inference.
Second, the repeated external campaign is incomplete for BFCL AgentBetta and especially for GAIA Reflexion.
Twenty-three of 573 intended BFCL AgentBetta attempts and 60 of 240 intended GAIA attempts across AgentBetta
and Reflexion remained unscored because the frozen provider could not be used for recovery. AgentBetta retained full
3/3 BFCL coverage on 178 of 191 tasks; Reflexion retained full 3/3 GAIA coverage on only 11 of 40 tasks. The BFCL
effect is therefore better supported than the GAIA comparison. The GAIA result is reported as exploratory and should
be updated if the frozen missing runs are recovered.
Third, eight excluded GAIA Reflexion runs exhausted the same model-call allowance subsequently needed by the
evaluation judge. Future campaigns should isolate the benchmark judge’s allowance from the agent’s execution
budget so that an agent’s internal call consumption cannot determine whether its final output is scoreable. Fourth,
the SWE-bench experiment contains only eight screened instances and uses a local reproduction rather than a large
official-environment campaign. Although the observed effect is large, the Holm-adjusted significance level exceeds
0.05.
Fifth, wall-clock time is confounded by provider retries and network behavior and is therefore excluded from the
principal efficiency claims. Tokens, model calls, model cost, and configuration exposure provide more reproducible
comparisons in the present data. Sixth, the cross-family replication contains only 16 BFCL tasks and one additional
local model family. Finally, contraction is local and dimension-wise; neither the algorithm nor the empirical results
establish a globally minimal configuration.
4.10
Implications for adaptive agent design
The combined evidence suggests that efficiency in agent systems should not be represented by a single scalar objective.
AgentBetta used more inference than ReAct on BFCL, less inference than the evaluated multi-agent configurations, and
far less inference than SWE-agent while also performing substantially worse on the coding pilot. The results therefore
motivate evaluating whether the resources, tools, authority, and procedural mechanisms allocated to a task are justified
by verified performance.
Within this interpretation, AgentBetta contributes an explicit control layer for heterogeneous capability. The controlled
experiments show that high-precision diagnosis can support selective expansion, and that verified configurations
can subsequently be tested for reducible capacity. The external experiments show that the value of this control is
task dependent: it can improve function-calling performance, compare favorably with the evaluated multi-agent
configurations on tasks solvable through a single execution path, remain unresolved against reflective reasoning, and
be insufficient when specialized procedural scaffolding dominates. Accordingly, the results indicate that adaptive
capability configuration complements reasoning, reflection, collaboration, and specialization rather than replacing them.
5
Conclusion
This study developed and evaluated AgentBetta, a verification-driven adaptive AI Nano-Agent that represents an agent’s
executable state as a joint configuration of model capability, context, tools, permissions, memory, computational
resources, execution bounds, and interaction limits. The central objective was not to minimize a single resource in
24


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
isolation, but to determine whether heterogeneous capability can be allocated, expanded, and reduced in response to task
evidence while preserving verifiable task completion. To this end, AgentBetta combines task-conditioned initialization,
configuration-deficiency diagnosis, dimension-selective expansion, runtime verification, controlled counterfactual
contraction, and empirical reuse of prior verified configurations within a single auditable control loop.
The controlled evaluation showed that the main performance contribution arises from diagnosis-guided adaptation
rather than from broad escalation. AgentBetta achieved 91.38% verified success, compared with 93.10% for Fixed
Full, while using substantially lower median context and tool exposure. Diagnosis achieved high precision across all
configuration dimensions, and selective expansion avoided unrelated configuration changes that were common under
wholesale escalation. Counterfactual contraction further demonstrated that some successful configurations contained
removable capability under the evaluated conditions: 56.41% of the evaluated one-dimension reductions remained
verifiable after re-execution. These results support the use of verification evidence both to identify insufficient capability
after failure and to test reducible capability after success. At the same time, the ablation results showed that contraction
and history reuse should not be interpreted as independent sources of higher task success under the evaluated conditions.
Their primary value was in exposure reduction and adaptation efficiency.
The external comparisons further clarify the role of adaptive configuration. On BFCL, AgentBetta achieved a modest
but statistically supported improvement in verified success over matched ReAct, although this gain required greater
token, model-call, and cost expenditure. On the evaluated 64-task BFCL subset, AgentBetta achieved higher verified
success and lower inference expenditure than the tested AutoGen and CrewAI configurations; this finding is restricted to
the evaluated configurations and task setting. By contrast, the GAIA comparison with Reflexion remained statistically
unresolved, despite lower inference expenditure for AgentBetta on the paired scoreable tasks. The SWE-bench
pilot provided a direct limitation on a universal performance claim: the specialized SWE-agent baseline achieved
a substantially higher observed task-resolution rate than AgentBetta on the evaluated repository-scale coding tasks.
Similarly, the cross-family experiment did not reproduce the primary-backbone accuracy ordering, indicating that the
benefit of adaptive configuration remains dependent on the capability of the underlying model and the evaluated task
distribution.
Overall, the findings support interpreting AgentBetta as a configuration-control mechanism whose effects depend on
the task, model, and execution environment. Adaptive configuration complements reasoning, reflection, collaboration,
and domain-specific procedural scaffolding rather than replacing them. The principal contribution is therefore the
treatment of heterogeneous agent capability as an explicit, observable, and revisable control object whose expansion
and contraction are conditioned on verification evidence and policy constraints. This formulation provides a practical
basis for reducing unjustified capability exposure while retaining the ability to escalate when a task demands additional
resources or authority.
Several limitations remain. The controlled benchmark isolates configuration behavior through a deterministic provider
and should not be interpreted as a direct measure of open-ended language-model intelligence. The repeated external
campaign contains incomplete BFCL and GAIA coverage because some frozen-provider runs could not be recovered,
with the GAIA comparison particularly affected. The SWE-bench study used only eight screened instances, and the
cross-family replication used a small additional-model panel. Wall-clock latency was also excluded from the principal
efficiency claims because provider retry behavior confounded timing measurements. Future work should therefore
evaluate AgentBetta across larger independent model families, complete repeated benchmark panels, separate evaluator
resources from agent execution budgets, and investigate whether accepted contraction evidence can be used to learn
smaller and more reliable initial configurations. A further direction is to treat specialized executors themselves as
selectable capabilities, allowing the adaptive controller to route tasks to domain-specific procedures when configuration
adjustment alone is insufficient.
Code Availability
The source code for AgentBetta is publicly available at https://github.com/ashraful388/AgentBetta. The
repository contains the maintained implementation of the framework [21].
References
[1] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R. Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React:
Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=WE_vluYUL-X.
[2] Timo Schick,
Jane Dwivedi-Yu,
Roberto Dessì,
Roberta Raileanu,
Maria Lomeli,
Eric Hambro,
Luke Zettlemoyer,
Nicola Cancedda,
and Thomas Scialom.
Toolformer:
Language models can
25


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
teach themselves to use tools.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36,
2023.
doi:10.52202/075280-2997.
URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2023/hash/
d842425e4bf79ba039352da0f658a906-Abstract-Conference.html.
[3] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language
agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36,
2023. doi:10.52202/075280-0377. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/
hash/1b44b878bb782e6954cd888628510e90-Abstract-Conference.html.
[4] Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang. Hugginggpt: Solving
ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in hugging face. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 36, 2023. doi:10.52202/075280-1657. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/
paper/2023/hash/77c33e6a367922d003ff102ffb92b658-Abstract-Conference.html.
[5] Jiayi Zhang, Jinyu Xiang, Zhaoyang Yu, Fengwei Teng, Xiong-Hui Chen, Jiaqi Chen, Mingchen Zhuge, Xin
Cheng, Sirui Hong, Jinlin Wang, Bingnan Zheng, Bang Liu, Yuyu Luo, and Chenglin Wu. Aflow: Automating
agentic workflow generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=z5uVAKwmjf.
[6] Ningning Wang, Xavier Hu, Pai Liu, He Zhu, Yue Hou, Heyuan Huang, Shengyu Zhang, Jian Yang, Jiaheng
Liu, Ge Zhang, Changwang Zhang, Jun Wang, Yuchen Eleanor Jiang, and Wangchunshu Zhou. Efficient agents:
Building effective agents while reducing cost, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.02694.
[7] Yulang Chen, Haoxuan Peng, Jinyan Liu, Zichen Wen, Dongrui Liu, and Linfeng Zhang. Agentslimming:
Towards efficient and cost-aware multi-agent systems.
In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 30064–30086. Association for
Computational Linguistics, July 2026. doi:10.18653/v1/2026.acl-long.1387. URL https://aclanthology.
org/2026.acl-long.1387/.
[8] Aditya Taparia, Som Sagar, and Ransalu Senanayake. Learning to configure agentic ai systems, 2026. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.11574.
[9] Jianhao Ruan, Zhihao Xu, Yiran Peng, Fashen Ren, Zhaoyang Yu, Xinbing Liang, Jinyu Xiang, Yongru Chen,
Bang Liu, Chenglin Wu, Yuyu Luo, and Jiayi Zhang. Aorchestra: Automating sub-agent creation for agentic
orchestration. In Proceedings of the 43rd International Conference on Machine Learning, 2026. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2602.03786.
[10] Hongjin Su, Shizhe Diao, Ximing Lu, Mingjie Liu, Jiacheng Xu, Xin Dong, Yonggan Fu, Peter Belcak, Hanrong Ye,
Hongxu Yin, Yi Dong, Evelina Bakhturina, Tao Yu, Yejin Choi, Jan Kautz, and Pavlo Molchanov. Toolorchestra:
Elevating intelligence via efficient model and tool orchestration. In Proceedings of the 43rd International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.21689.
[11] Zhuofeng Li, Haoxiang Zhang, Seungju Han, Sheng Liu, Jianwen Xie, Yu Zhang, Yejin Choi, James Zou, and Pan
Lu. In-the-flow agentic system optimization for effective planning and tool use. In International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Mf5AleTUVK.
[12] Alizer Wong, Heng Cui, Yi Tan, Xiongchao Zhan, Liang Lin, Yuxiang Guo, Zhaorong Dai, Zixin Zeng, and
Wenyuan Li. Eureka: Task-conditioned meta-agent orchestration for scientific discovery, 2026. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2608.19047.
[13] Junjie Yin and Xinyu Feng. Do ai agents know when a task is simple? toward complexity-aware reasoning and
execution, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2607.13034.
[14] Marianne Menglin Liu, Daniel Garcia, Fjona Parllaku, Vikas Upadhyay, Syed Fahad Allam Shah, and Dan Roth.
Toolscope: Enhancing llm agent tool use through tool merging and context-aware filtering. In Proceedings
of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
34095–34119. Association for Computational Linguistics, July 2026. doi:10.18653/v1/2026.acl-long.1573. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2026.acl-long.1573/.
[15] Ziqi Lin, Ye Wu, Mengying Yang, Xu Liu, Yizhou Liu, Qiang Ke, and Qin Guo. Tracer: Per-tool context retention
for llm agents via consequence-attributed reinforcement learning, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.
29363.
[16] Qing Ye and Jing Tan. Agent contracts: A formal framework for resource-bounded autonomous ai systems, 2026.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.08815. Accepted for oral presentation at COINE 2026, co-located with
AAMAS 2026.
[17] Reshabh K. Sharma, Linxi Jiang, Shuo Chen, and Zhiqiang Lin. Beyond oauth: Task-scoped authorization for ai
agents via natural language slices, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.17170.
26


AgentBetta: an adaptive AI Nano-Agent framework
[18] Rasmus Moorits Veski, Rachid Guerraoui, and David Froelicher. Capmas: Capability-based delegation of
privileges in multi-agent systems, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2609.06500.
[19] Jiarun Fu, Lizhong Ding, Sida Chen, Honglei Xin, Chunhui Zhang, Pengqi Li, Qiuning Wei, Ye Yuan, and Guoren
Wang. Chill-harness: Counterfactual harness learning for efficient reasoning in long-horizon agents, 2026. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2607.25825.
[20] Boqin Yuan, Renchu Song, Yue Su, Sen Yang, and Jing Qin. Clawtrace: Cost-aware tracing for llm agent
skill distillation. In Agent Skills ’26 Workshop, ACM Conference on AI and Agentic Systems, May 2026. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.23853. San José, California, USA.
[21] Md. Ashraful Babu. AgentBetta: Verification-driven adaptive configuration of an ai nano-agent. https://
github.com/ashraful388/AgentBetta, 2026. Software repository, accessed 19 September 2026.
[22] Shishir G. Patil, Huanzhi Mao, Fanjia Yan, Charlie Cheng-Jie Ji, Vishnu Suresh, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E.
Gonzalez. The berkeley function calling leaderboard (BFCL): From tool use to agentic evaluation of large
language models. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 267 of
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 48371–48392. PMLR, 2025. URL https://proceedings.
mlr.press/v267/patil25a.html.
[23] Grégoire Mialon,
Clémentine Fourrier,
Craig Swift,
Thomas Wolf,
Yann LeCun,
and Thomas
Scialom.
GAIA: A benchmark for general ai assistants.
In International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations, 2024.
URL https://proceedings.iclr.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/
25ae35b5b1738d80f1f03a8713e405ec-Abstract-Conference.html.
[24] Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R. Narasimhan.
SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In The Twelfth International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=VTF8yNQM66.
[25] Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun
Zhang, Jiale Liu, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah, Ryen W. White, Doug Burger, and Chi Wang. Autogen: Enabling
next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversation. In Proceedings of the First Conference on Language
Modeling, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=BAakY1hNKS.
[26] CrewAI Inc. Crewai documentation: Multi-agent crews and flows. Software documentation, 2026. URL
https://docs.crewai.com/. Accessed 16 September 2026.
[27] John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir
Press. SWE-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2024. doi:10.52202/079017-1601. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.
15793.
27
