Autonomous Quantum Transport Measurements of 2D Semiconductors by an AI Agent 
 
Brandon Bauer1, Matthew Whalen1, Kenji Watanabe2, Takashi Taniguchi2, John Q. Xiao1, Tao 
E. Li1*, Wenjin Zhao1* 
 
1Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA 
2National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, 305-0044 Tsukuba, Japan  
 
Email: wzhao@udel.edu; taoeli@udel.edu 
 
Abstract: 
Artificial-intelligence (AI) agents are beginning to enter experimental laboratories, automating 
experiments and accelerating scientific discovery. Herein, we introduce an AI-driven workflow in 
which an AI agent performs multi-step, multi-day quantum transport measurements end-to-end. 
Specifically, given brief instructions, the agent starts by planning the multi-step measurements, 
then safely operates the cryogenic instruments, analyzes the data, and concludes with a final report. 
We demonstrate this AI workflow on multiple monolayer and bilayer MoS₂ devices. Through 
autonomous measurement campaigns lasting up to six days, the agent determined the conduction-
band spin–orbit coupling energy in monolayer MoS₂, and mapped a layer- and valley-resolved 
phase diagram in bilayer MoS₂. This experimental workflow is implemented through the 
FermiLink agent harness, which emphasizes instrumental safety and the reliability of the 
measurement and analysis.  The framework is general and can be readily adapted to other types of 
experiments, representing a step toward self-driving laboratories. 
 
Introduction 
Quantum transport measurements are central to the discovery of electronic phases in quantum 
materials, including superconductors, topological insulators, and strongly correlated insulators 1–4. 
Understanding these materials often requires high-dimensional datasets, which typically depend 
on experimental parameters ranging from multiple gate voltages and magnetic fields to 
temperature.  Acquiring and interpreting such datasets is time-consuming and requires substantial 
expertise in condensed-matter physics. The advance of large-language models (LLMs) and 
artificial intelligence (AI) agents raises the possibility of automating tasks normally performed by 
experimentalists 5–16. However, important barriers remain. Specifically, as quantum material 
devices are delicate and cryogenic instruments are fragile and valuable, unreliable agent actions 
can compromise both the experiment and equipment. While literature for reporting single-step or 
human-in-the-loop experimental measurements is emerging, end-to-end AI-enabled multi-step 
quantum transport measurements in the absence of human intervention are still missing 15,16.  


Here, we introduce a design principle for robust, agent-enabled, multistep, end-to-end quantum 
transport measurements. We start by examining the capacity of our agent workflow on simulated 
measurements of two-dimensional (2D) materials. With satisfactory performance, we utilized this 
agent framework by measuring two different types of MoS₂ devices from end-to-end with 
cryogenic instruments. For monolayer MoS2 devices, the agent successfully determined the 
conduction-band spin–orbit coupling (SOC) energy, whereas for bilayer MoS2 devices, it mapped 
the layer- and valley-resolved phase diagram. As this agent workflow directly generates high-
quality quantum transport measurement reports from very brief initial instruction, we believe this 
AI automation attempt may provide a valuable resource for the quantum materials community. 
 
Autonomous Experimentation Framework 
Published papers and commercially available LLMs usually do not contain detailed information 
on how to perform a quantum transport study and the associated decision tree regarding when to 
pursue or abandon an experimental step. Moreover, because one quantum transport measurement 
may take hours or days to finish, this duration may exceed a typical session of an agent run using 
Codex or Claude Code, leading to unstable outcomes during multi-step measurements using 
commercially available AI agents. Aiming for autonomous agent-enabled multi-step quantum 
transport measurements, we first established an experimental loop workflow within the recently 
developed FermiLink agent harness 17. This agent harness robustly enables multi-step 
experimental measurements, where the harness fully controls polling of instrumental status during 
long-waiting measurements, while the underlying AI agents, such as Codex and Claude Code, 
determine the next measurement commands and post-processing for each experimental step. 
Then, we create an initial template for hypothesis-driven Agent Skills based on our experience, 
which provides detailed domain knowledge and hard-coded controlling and post-processing scripts 
for previous transport measurements on 2D quantum materials. Since the initial template is not 
robust enough to enable multi-step agent measurements, we use a small set of existing 
measurement data and apply the FermiLink harness to perform simulated measurements (which 
we call dry runs) and update the Agent Skills iteratively (Fig. 1b), until the Agent Skills become 
sufficiently stable for enabling end-to-end multi-step autonomous measurements (Supplementary 
Figure 1).  
Fig. 1a provides a detailed multi-step workflow for autonomous quantum transport measurements, 
given the established FermiLink harness and converged Agent Skills. After a 2D materials device 
is loaded in a dilution refrigerator and the user provides a brief measurement instruction (e.g., 
“Measure the conduction-band spin-orbit coupling energy of monolayer MoS2”), the FermiLink 
harness (i) assigns a measurement agent to design a detailed parameter sweep for a focused task 
on the dilution refrigerator and electronics. After the measurement agent submits a single-step 


long-duration measurement, FermiLink (ii) polls the experimental status in the absence of AI 
agents and (iii) then handles the finished experimental data and project memory to a new analysis 
agent for reasoning and post-processing. Each complete step from (i) to (iii) answers a focused 
scientific question, and the iterative loop of procedures ensures that the multi-step, multi-day 
quantum transport measurement, which ends with a comprehensive report, can be accomplished 
autonomously without human intervention. In this work, Codex with the LLM model gpt-5.5-
xhigh is used as the underlying measurement and analysis agent, although the FermiLink harness 
can also connect to other AI agents such as Claude Code and OpenCode. 
One key feature of our agent framework is protecting both the 2D materials devices and the 
instrument. For example, all hardware access is mediated by a frozen acquisition Python script 
rather than controlled directly by AI agents. Hardware safety constraints such as gate voltage limits, 
sweep rates, magnetic field, and temperature range are hard-coded in the Python script, prohibiting 
the agent from modifying them. This hard safety gate increases our confidence in using AI agents 
for end-to-end experiments. 
 
MoS2 Devices and Electronic Structure 
We use MoS2 devices to demonstrate the agent-enabled autonomous quantum transport 
measurements. MoS2 belongs to group-VI transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), MX₂ (M = 
Mo or W; X = S, Se, or Te) 18–20. As shown in Fig. 2a, TMDs have a hexagonal crystal structure 
consisting of a transition metal layer sandwiched between two chalcogen layers in trigonal 
prismatic coordination geometry. These materials are semiconductors with band gaps typically in 
the range of 1–2 eV. Monolayer TMDs are direct-gap semiconductors, with band edges located at 
the K and K' valleys 21 (Fig. 2b). Near these valley extrema, the conduction and valence band edges 
exhibit parabolic dispersions. Because inversion symmetry is broken in monolayer TMDs, SOC 
lifts the spin degeneracy. The spin polarization is out-of-plane, with spin splitting typically on the 
order of hundreds of meV in the valence band and several to tens of meV in the conduction band 
22. We focus on the conduction band in the rest of the study.  
In bilayer MoS2, the top layer stacks antiparallel to the bottom layer, and the inversion symmetry 
is recovered. At K and K′ valleys, the spin-up and spin-down bands become degenerate. In addition, 
the six Q valleys, located roughly midway between Γ and K, can approach or even drop below the 
K and K′ valleys in the conduction band 23–25.  Moreover, the interlayer tunneling at the K and K′ 
valleys is small due to the momentum mismatch of the band with the same spin, so the layer degree 
of freedom enters. At a small perpendicular electric field, the K and K′ valleys of both layers are 
nearly degenerate, whereas a finite electric field polarizes carriers onto one layer 26,27. 
Distinguishing these scenarios from quantum transport requires combining quantum oscillation 
frequencies, Hall densities, and their evolution with gate voltages 28–32.  


The MoS2 device has a Hall bar shape with four gates as shown in Figs. 2c and 2d. The top and 
bottom gates control the carrier density and electric field independently. The combination of 
contact and split gates enables transport measurements at low perpendicular electric field and 
carrier density. To form low-resistance ohmic contacts to the conduction band of MoS2, we use 
silver for the electrode because it has a low work function of about 4.2 eV and matches well with 
the conduction band 33. Fig. 2e shows a representative I-V characteristic at the base temperature 
(10 mK) of the dilution refrigerator. A clear metal-to-insulator transition is also observed 
(Supplementary Figure 2). Unless otherwise specified, all measurements reported below were 
performed at 10 mK. 
 
Monolayer MoS2 Device Campaign 
We first demonstrate the end-to-end autonomous experimentation framework using a monolayer 
MoS₂ device campaign.  Overall, as shown in Fig. 3, the whole process aims to address scientific 
questions about which carrier density populates the upper band in K and K′ valleys and the 
conduction-band SOC energy.  
Constrained by the hypothesis-driven Agent Skills, the first measurement agent aims to answer a 
focused question: what is the conducting gate-voltage window? (Fig. 3a). It then decides to 
measure the 𝑅!! dependence of 𝑉"# and generates the measurement commands. After the 
measurement is completed, the analysis agent analyzes the gate dependence to determine the turn-
on voltage by tracking the most negative value of 
$%!!
$&"#. Then the analysis agent evaluates the result 
against the acceptance criteria and decides whether to proceed to the next step, redo the gate-
dependence measurement, or conclude with a low-quality device by skipping further 
measurements. With sufficient evidence in the previous step, the second measurement agent tries 
to answer a different question: Where do quantum oscillations appear in the plane of 𝑉"# and 𝐵? 
To address this question, the agent decides to perform the Landau fan measurement (Fig. 3b). In 
detail, it chooses the range of 𝑉"# starting from the turn-on voltage based on the previous-step 
outcome. After the measurement is finished, a new agent analyzes the data by performing the Fast 
Fourier Transform (FFT) against 1/𝐵 for each 𝑉"#and defines 12 provisional frequency branches 
and 2 provisional fundamental frequencies (𝐹' and 𝐹() for further analysis (Supplementary Figure 
1). 
After these two rounds of agent loops, a new measurement agent (Fig. 3c) answers the question of 
whether the FFT frequencies obtained at the previous step are reliable. Specifically, the agent 
decides to sweep 𝐵 continuously at selected 𝑉"#. Following this experiment, a new analysis agent 
analyzes the fundamental FFT frequency and compares it with the provisional fundamental 
frequency. After gathering this information, a new measurement agent focuses on addressing what 


is the degeneracy of band corresponding to each fundamental FFT frequency, which can be 
answered by performing the Hall resistance measurement shown in Fig. 3d. A new analysis agent 
follows this measurement and compares the Hall density with fundamental FFT frequency and 
concludes that there exists only one fundamental frequency (𝐹') with degeneracy of 2 below 𝑉"# =
1.4 𝑉, while the second fundamental frequency (𝐹() starts from 𝑉"# = 1.4 𝑉with degeneracy of 2.  
To conclude this autonomous agent workflow, a new agent provides the final assignment of the 
branches in the FFT map with four confidential levels: accepted, rejected, ambiguous, or 
unassigned. This agent concludes that only the lower conduction band is occupied below the carrier 
density 𝑛≈3.4 × 10'( 𝑐𝑚)(, and the associated SOC splitting energy is 13 meV with the given 
effective mass 31 (Supplementary Figure 3).  
To examine the robustness of this monolayer MoS2 agent workflow, we repeat this autonomous 
agent campaign on a second, low-quality monolayer device. Very interestingly, after step 2 
(Supplementary Figure 4), the agent fails to assign clear FFT peaks, but it still tries to scan 𝐵 at 
two 𝑉"# values. Because the results from this step are still negative, the agent skips the rest of the 
measurement and jumps to the last step to generate a report stating that no peak is accepted in the 
FFT map. This negative test case clearly demonstrates that our hypothesis-driven AI agent harness 
behaves more like a condensed-matter experimentalist than a simple deterministic experimental 
workflow. 
 
Bilayer MoS2 Device Campaign 
Compared to monolayer MoS2 devices, performing quantum transport measurements on bilayer 
MoS2 devices poses a qualitatively harder challenge for AI agents. The phase diagram of bilayer 
MoS2 devices is sensitive to both the carrier density (𝑛) and electric field (𝐸). For the bilayer MoS2 
measurements, as demonstrated in Fig. 4, the agents collectively address the scientific problem of 
which layer and valley components are occupied in the plane of 𝑛 and 𝐸. 
As in the monolayer MoS2 measurements, at each round of the experimental loop, the agent aims 
to answer a focused question through experimental measurements.  For example, the first 
measurement agent concentrates on: what is the ratio of top/bottom hBN thickness (Fig. 4a). To 
resolve this question, the agent measures the 𝑅!! as a function of 𝑉"# and 𝑉*# at 𝐵= 0. Then, an 
analysis agent tracks the constant resistance in the contour plot and captures the ratio of top and 
bottom hBN thickness, followed by plotting the 𝑅!! as a function of 𝐸 and a provisional 𝑛.  
What are the thicknesses of top and bottom hBN? To answer this second question, a new 
measurement agent subsequently measures the Hall resistance 𝑅!+  at 𝐵= ±6 T and 𝑉"# = 2 V 
by sweeping the 𝑉*# for calibration (Fig. 4b). After this measurement, an analysis agent fits the 
Hall density dependence with 𝑉*# and calculates the hBN thicknesses. For the third round, the 


agent now focuses on a new question: where are layer-polarized and layer-shared boundaries in 
the plane of 𝑛 and 𝐸. To resolve this issue, the agent measures the 𝑅!! map of 𝑉"# and 𝑉*# at 𝐵=
6, 9, 13 T. Then, a new analysis agent plots the data and extracts the phase boundaries by 
determining the point at which the strips from the quantum oscillation of 𝑅!! becomes diagonal in 
the 𝑛−𝐸 phase space. It analyses the maps at different magnetic fields and concludes with a 
schematic showing the layer-polarized and layer-shared regions (Fig. 4c and Supplementary Figure 
5). After this step, a final measurement agent answers: what is the valley occupation in each region? 
The Agent Skills have background knowledge that the degeneracy is 2 for the K valley lower and 
upper bands and 12 for the Q valley, while in the charge-shared region, the degeneracy doubles 
due to layer degeneracy. With this background knowledge, the agent decides to choose three 
electric fields that cut through three regions and measures the Landau fan diagram. After the 
measurements finish, a new agent extracts the fundamental frequency and assigns them to 
degeneracy and valleys (Fig. 4d). Finally, a new agent draws the phase diagram in the plane of 𝑛 
and 𝐸 to show the layer and valley occupations (Fig. 4e). The autonomous agent campaign on a 
second bilayer device is included in Supplementary Figure 6. 
 
Discussion and Outlook 
In conclusion, we developed a multi-step agent harness for autonomously studying 2D materials 
devices. Using experimentally validated Agent Skills for monolayer and bilayer TMD devices, the 
agent can reliably run multi-step experiments end-to-end over many days within the FermiLink 
harness.  
Three design choices appear essential for the reliability of experimental outcomes. First, the 
decision-tree structure of Agent Skills, which contains one narrow question per step with 
quantitative acceptance criteria, converts open-ended experimentation into a sequence of verifiable 
decisions. Second, multiple measurement and analysis agents working under the same file system 
allow a coherent experimental campaign to span many days via shared memory documents and 
experimental data. Third, the separation between the agent-writable surface and the hardware 
safety layer provides a hard safety gate for protecting both the valuable TMD devices and 
cryogenic equipment, increasing our confidence in using AI agents for quantum transport 
measurements. 
Despite these insights, the limitations of this work are equally instructive. At this moment, for 
every new type of 2D device, human experts must collaborate with AI agents to develop robust 
Agent Skills for autonomous multi-step measurements using the existing dataset via dry runs (Fig. 
1b). Thus, the autonomy demonstrated here primarily concerns the execution and adaptation of 
expert-defined experimental workflows, and it would be more appealing for AI agents to 


independently formulate measurement strategies from first principles. To this end, an important 
future direction is to develop AI agents that can construct and validate new Agent Skills from prior 
experimental datasets and a library of established workflows. As such a library expands across 
materials and device architectures, agents may be able to identify reusable measurement and 
analysis patterns while retaining safety constraints. Moreover, beyond performing human-defined 
experimental workflows, future agents could simultaneously propose scientific questions, design 
discriminating experiments, perform theoretical calculations for cross-validation, and search for 
large experimental parameter spaces for novel phases. While achieving broader scientific 
autonomy remains challenging, our work represents a step toward self-driving laboratories of 
quantum materials discovery 11,14,34. 
 
References 
1. 
Klitzing, K. V., Dorda, G. & Pepper, M. New method for high-accuracy determination of 
the fine-structure constant based on quantized hall resistance. Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 494–497 
(1980). 
2. 
König, M. et al. Quantum Spin Hall Insulator State in HgTe Quantum Wells. Science 318, 
766–771 (2007). 
3. 
Lee, P. A., Nagaosa, N. & Wen, X. G. Doping a Mott insulator: Physics of high-
temperature superconductivity. Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 17–85 (2006). 
4. 
Cao, Y. et al. Unconventional superconductivity in magic-angle graphene superlattices. 
Nature 556, 43–50 (2018). 
5. 
Boiko, D. A., Macknight, R., Kline, B. & Gomes, G. Autonomous chemical research with 
large language models. Nature 624, 570–578 (2023). 
6. 
Merchant, A. et al. Scaling deep learning for materials discovery. Nature 624, 80–85 
(2023). 
7. 
Staab, M. et al. Electronic and chemical phase identification in photoemission 
experiments using unsupervised machine learning. arXiv: 2608.19503 (2026). 
8. 
Zwolak, J. P. & Taylor, J. M. Colloquium : Advances in automation of quantum dot 
devices control. Rev. Mod. Phys. 95, 011006 (2023). 
9. 
Gottweis, J. et al. Accelerating scientific discovery with Co-Scientist. Nature 655, 487–
496 (2026). 
10. 
Ghareeb, A. E. et al. A multi-agent system for automating scientific discovery. Nature 
655, 497–505 (2026). 
11. 
Qiu, S. et al. AIMS: An uncertainty-aware AI experimentalist for quantum matter. arXiv: 
2607.16544 (2026). 
12. 
Isogawa, T., Okabe, R., Phadetsuwannukun, N., Li, M. & Cappellaro, P. Agentic AI for 
Scientific Reasoning in Autonomous Quantum Sensing Experiments. arXiv: 2607.25145 


(2026). 
13. 
Li, X. et al. An AI-driven robotic system for two-dimensional hetero-assemblies. arXiv: 
2605.20420 (2026). 
14. 
Shi, L. et al. Qumus: Realization of An Embodied AI Quantum Material Experimentalist 
Lihan. arXiv: 2605.18407 (2026). 
15. 
Li, S. et al. Large Language Model-Assisted Superconducting Qubit Experiments. arXiv: 
2603.08801 (2026). 
16. 
Wang, D., Qi, L., Xie, Y., Linke, N. M. & Brown, K. R. A hardware-safety-gated system 
for LLM-written native ARTIQ control code on a trapped-ion platform. arXiv: 
2606.27231 (2026). 
17. 
Meng, G. et al. FermiLink: A Unified Agent Framework for Multidomain Autonomous 
Scientific Simulations. arXiv: 1, 2604.03460 (2026). 
18. 
Mak, K. F., Lee, C., Hone, J., Shan, J. & Heinz, T. F. Atomically Thin MoS 2 : A New 
Direct-Gap Semiconductor. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 136805 (2010). 
19. 
Splendiani, A. et al. Emerging Photoluminescence in Monolayer MoS2. Nano Lett. 10, 
1271–1275. (2010). 
20. 
Xu, X., Yao, W., Xiao, D. & Heinz, T. F. Spin and pseudospins in layered transition metal 
dichalcogenides. Nat. Phys. 10, 343–350 (2014). 
21. 
Xiao, D., Liu, G., Feng, W., Xu, X. & Yao, W. Coupled Spin and Valley Physics in 
Monolayers of MoS2 and Other Group-VI Dichalcogenides. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 196802 
(2012). 
22. 
Liu, G. Bin, Shan, W. Y., Yao, Y., Yao, W. & Xiao, D. Three-band tight-binding model 
for monolayers of group-VIB transition metal dichalcogenides. Phys. Rev. B 88, 085433 
(2013). 
23. 
Kormányos, A. et al. k · p theory for two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenide 
semiconductors. 2D Mater. 2, 022001 (2015). 
24. 
Nguyen, P. V. et al. Visualizing electrostatic gating effects in two-dimensional 
heterostructures. Nature 572, 220–223. 
25. 
Wu, Z. et al. Even-odd layer-dependent magnetotransport of high-mobility Q-valley 
electrons in transition metal disulfides. Nat. Commun. 7, 12955 (2016). 
26. 
Lee, J., Mak, K. F. & Shan, J. Electrical control of the valley Hall effect in bilayer MoS 2 
transistors. Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 421–425 (2016). 
27. 
Wu, S. et al. Electrical tuning of valley magnetic moment through symmetry control in 
bilayer MoS 2. Nat. Phys. 9, 149–153 (2013). 
28. 
Masseroni, M. et al. Gate-Tunable Band Edge in Few-Layer MoS2. Nano Lett. 25, 10472–
10477 (2025). 
29. 
Fallahazad, B. et al. Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations of high-mobility holes in monolayer 
and bilayer WSe2: Landau level degeneracy, effective mass, and negative compressibility. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 086601 (2016). 


30. 
Movva, H. C. P. et al. Density-Dependent Quantum Hall States and Zeeman Splitting in 
Monolayer and Bilayer WSe2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 247701 (2017). 
31. 
Pisoni, R. et al. Interactions and Magnetotransport through Spin-Valley Coupled Landau 
Levels in Monolayer MoS 2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 247701 (2018). 
32. 
Lin, J. et al. Determining Interaction Enhanced Valley Susceptibility in Spin- Valley-
Locked MoS2. Nano Lett. 19, 1736−1742 (2019). 
33. 
Liu, Y. et al. Approaching the Schottky–Mott limit in van der Waals metal–semiconductor 
junctions. Nature 557, 696–700 (2018). 
34. 
Burger, B. et al. A mobile robotic chemist. Nature 583, 237–241 (2020). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Figure 1. Autonomous experimentation framework. a, End-to-end agent operation. Given a 
user-supplied brief instruction, the FermiLink agent harness launches a measurement agent that 
plans the scan and decides the parameters (e.g., carrier density n, electric field E, and magnetic 
field B), followed by submitting the measurement to the experimental hardware through a parser-
controlled acquisition interface. When the measurement finishes, an analysis agent post-processes 
the data and decides whether to proceed to the next step or skip to the final step based on the 
acceptance criteria. The measurement-analysis loop repeats until all sub-questions predefined in 
Agent Skills are answered and a final Report is generated. b, Development of hypothesis-driven 
Agent Skills. Starting from a measurement dataset and provisional Agent Skills, the AI agents 
simulate the experimental measurements and analysis against the dataset, while a human expert 
determines whether to further modify the Agent Skills for more robust performance. The 
converged Agent Skills are provided for the FermiLink harness for real experiments. 


 
Fig. 2 | MoS₂ devices and electronic structure. a, Top view of the TMD lattice, with the transition 
metal (blue) and chalcogen (grey) sublattices. Right inset: the hexagonal Brillouin zone, indicating 
the Γ, K, and K′ points and the Q valleys. b, Schematic band structure at the K and K′ valleys of 
monolayer MoS₂. Red and blue denote spin-up and spin-down bands. c, Schematic cross-section 
of the dual-gated Hall bar device. The MoS₂ channel (red) is encapsulated in hBN, with graphite 
top (TG) and bottom (BG) gates, Pd contact/split gates (CG/SG), and Ag electrodes. d, Optical 
image of the device, with the MoS₂ flake outlined in red and the gate electrodes labeled as in c. 
Scale bar, 10 μm. e, Representative two-terminal I–V characteristic measured at 10 mK. 
 
 
 


 
Figure 3. Autonomous monolayer MoS₂ campaign. Each row is one round of the experiment 
loop, labeled by the sub-question the agent set out to answer. The left figures present the raw data, 
and the right figures show the agent analysis. a, 𝑅!! as a function of 𝑉"# at 𝐵= 0. The turn-on 
voltage 𝑉"#_-. = 0.43 V is marked by the black dotted line. b, 𝑅!! as a function of 𝑉"# and 𝐵 (left) 
and its gate-resolved FFT in 1/𝐵 (right). The provisional frequency branches (𝐹', 𝐹(, 2𝐹', 𝐹' −
𝐹() and the 𝐹( onset are marked. c, A representative continuous field sweep at 𝑉"# = 1.73 𝑉 (left) 
and its FFT (right). The fundamental frequency 𝐹' and its harmonics 2𝐹' and 3𝐹' are marked. d, 
Hall resistance 𝑅!+ at 𝐵= 1 T (left) and the Hall density 𝑛/ as a function of 𝑉"# (right). The 
orange circles compare 𝑛/ with the density calculated from the FFT frequencies after assigning 
the degeneracy of each band. e, Extracted frequencies 𝐹' and 𝐹( versus 𝑉"# , each assigned 
degeneracy 𝑔 = 2, yielding a conduction-band SOC splitting energy ∆0-1≈13 meV. 


 
Fig. 4. Autonomous bilayer MoS₂ campaign. Each row is one round of the experiment loop, 
labeled by the sub-question the agent set out to answer. a, 𝑅!! as a function of 𝑉"# and 𝑉*# (left) 
and 𝑛 and 𝐸 (right). b, 𝑅!+ at 𝐵= 6 T (left) and Hall density 𝑛/ (right) versus 𝑛. The fit window 
used to calibrate the thickness of top and bottom hBNs is shown by the blue dashed line. c, Left: 
𝑅!! contour map at 𝐵 = 13 T. Right: provisional layer boundaries assigned by the agent. d, 𝑅!! 
as a function of 𝑛 and 𝐵 at 𝐸 = −0.275 V/nm (left) and its normalized gate-resolved FFT (right). 
e, Top: fundamental frequencies 𝐹' and 𝐹( with degeneracy and valley assignments. Right: the 
final annotated phase diagram, showing the layer-polarized and layer-shared regions together with 
the valley boundaries. 
