Topology-Stratified Materials Discovery with A
Flow-Based Generative Model
Jingyi Zhou1, Oyshee Chowdhury1, Noah Oyeniran1,
Chongze Hu1,2*
1*Department of Aerospace Engineering and Mechanics, University of
Alabama, Tuscaloosa, 35487, Alabama, United States.
2Alabama Materials Institute, The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa,
35487, Alabama, United States.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): hucz@ua.edu;
Abstract
Accurate generation of crystal structures is the foundation to the discovery
of high-performance materials for extreme-environment applications, such as
aerospace, additive manufacturing, and fusion energy systems. Although gen-
erative modeling has emerged as a promising approach for crystal design, its
performance remains limited by the complex crystal structures and diverse chem-
ical compositions. In this work, we develop UFO-MGen, a universal flow-based
generative model that learns topological features of Wyckoff representations and
leverages this information to accurately generate crystals across vast structural
and chemical spaces. Compared with state-of-the-art generative models, UFO-
MGen achieves the highest crystal generation success rate under a rigorous
multi-stability evaluation framework, the highest SUN (stable, unique, novel)
rate, and a remarkable extrapolation capability that has not been reported by
previous models. Furthermore, a fine-tuning module is implemented to UFO-
MGen for property-constrained crystal generation, enabling the inverse materials
design toward target properties. The UFO-MGen opens a new avenue for accel-
erated materials discovery and providing a foundation for universal materials
intelligence.
Keywords: Crystal structure generation, generative models, Wychoff Representation,
Topology, Inverse Materials Design
1
arXiv:2609.26547v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  22 Sep 2026


1 Introduction
As humanity moves toward the middle of 21st century, the development of high-
performance, low-cost, and sustainable materials has become a top research priority
across nearly all advanced technologies, including hypersonic vehicles [1], smart man-
ufacturing [2, 3], and fusion energy [4, 5]. The rise of artificial intelligence (AI)
and data-driven techniques has transformed materials discovery from a traditional
trial-and-error Edison explorations into an era of intelligent design [6–8]. Although
hundreds of thousands of materials are predicted by AI-driven framework each year,
with many experimentally validated [9–11], these design strategies still concentrate
on expanding the compositional and structural spaces of existing material systems.
The vast landscape of unexplored material systems still hold enormous potential
for developing next-generation materials toward superior stability, properties, and
performance [12, 13].
Accurate generation of previously unknown crystal structures is the foundation for
discovering innovative materials with exceptional properties [14–19]. However, gen-
erating unknown crystals remains notoriously challenging because of the enormous
number of crystallographic configurations, diverse chemical environments, and strin-
gent physical constrains (e.g., crystal symmetry) in real material systems [20, 21].
Although generative models have emerged as a powerful technique for navigating
the highly irregular and constrained crystallographic space, their ability to generate
physically reliable crystals remains very limited [22], particularly for complex crystal
structures with large unit cells. Moreover, existing crystal generative models have pri-
marily demonstrated strong interpolation capability for the crystal structures sampled
in the training data, while their ability to extrapolate beyond the learned crystal-
lographic space remains limited. This poor extrapolation capability fundamentally
restricts their potential to discover truly novel materials beyond the existing domain
knowledge.
In this work, we present UFO-MGen (Universal Flow Omni-Materials Generation),
a flow matching-based generative model capable of accurately generating previously
unknown crystals across broad crystallographic and chemical spaces (Fig. 1). To rig-
orously evaluate the quality of generated structures, we further propose a physically
rigorous multi-stability evaluation (MSE) framework based on thermodynamic, lattice-
dynamic, and thermal stabilities (Fig. 2). Benchmark results show that UFO-MGen
outperforms all existing crystal generative models under the MSE criteria while also
achieving the highest SUN (stable, unique, novel) rate (Fig. 3). More importantly,
UFO-MGen has demonstrated superior extrapolation capability that has never been
reported in any prior generative models (Fig. 3). Compared with traditional diffu-
sion models, UFO-MGen achieves higher accuracy and faster convergence speed due
to two unique mechanisms: (i) unified Wyckoff representation and (ii) flow-matching
generation engine (Fig. 4). Finally, a fine-tuning module is also introduced to UFO-
MGen for property-constrained generation, enabling the inverse design of materials
with exceptional properties for targeted engineering applications (Fig. 5).
2


2 Results
2.1 Unified Wyckoff representation
Generative crystal modeling requires a precise representation of crystal structures in a
low-dimensional yet physically unified space [23]. Among existing methods, the Wyck-
off representation [24] is one of the most widely used, as shown in Fig. 1(a). It provides
a compact description of periodic crystal through its space group (G), lattice parame-
ters (ℓ), the number of Wyckoff orbits (K), Wyckoff letters (ω1:K) and chemical species
(s1:K) for each K, and Wyckoff coordinates (xorb) [25], see Supplementary Section
1.1. For generation purpose, all Wyckoff information must be incorporated within a
unified generative space. However, the Wyckoff representation includes both discrete
features (e.g., G, K, ω, s1:K) and continuous components (e.g., ℓand xorb), which
belong to distinct mathematical domains and therefore require different modeling
strategies. Unfortunately, existing models [25–27] overlook this fundamental difference
and instead directly combine these heterogeneous features within a single generative
framework. As such, a physically consistent unification of discrete and continuous
Wyckoff information is essential for accurate crystal generation.
The mathematical unification of discrete and continuous information can be traced
to the concept of fiber bundles in topology [28]. Inspired by this theory, we adopt the
analogous terms “scaffold” (c) and “fiber” (F) to denote the discrete and continu-
ous features of the Wyckoff representation, respectively (Supplementary Section 1.2).
Accordingly, a scaffold is expressed as c = (G, K, ω1:K, s1:K), which encodes the key
structural information (e.g., symmetry) and thus dominates the complexity of crystal
generation. We introduce two parameters to quantify the dimensionality of a scaffold:
the intrinsic dimension, Drep and the compression ratio, ρ. Specifically, Drep defines a
reduced-dimensional space that stratifies crystal structures according to their intrinsic
structural complexity. Since Drep is always smaller than the 3N+6 degrees of freedom
(DOFs) of a periodic crystal containing N atoms, ρ = Drep/(3N + 6) is defined to
quantify the dimensionality reduction relative to the original crystal representation.
By calculating the scaffold parameters (Drep and ρ) for all 154,875 crystal structures
in the Materials Project (MP) database [29], we identify 32,550 trainable structures
spanning 35 distinct space groups. Further analysis of these structures demonstrates
that the proposed scaffold parameters effectively capture intrinsic complexity of diverse
crystal structures in the MP database (Supplementary Section 1.3).
Although scaffolds encode key structural information, continuous fibers also play
critical roles in crystal generation, as they preserve the symmetry changes associated
with special Wyckoff positions within a given Drep. These special positions typically
correspond to high-symmetry Wyckoff coordinates that reduce the DOFs of a periodic
crystal. However, traditional generative models learn these special features on a fixed-
dimensional space along with other Wyckoff information [25–27], thus overlooking the
key scaffold features associate with these special positions. To address this limita-
tion, we treat these special positions as shared boundaries between continuous fibers
with distinct Drep, thereby providing a unified description of fibers across different
scaffolds and enabling structural transitions throughout the entire stratified Wyckoff
space (Supplementary Section 2.1). By processing the fibers of all 32,550 trainable
3


structures, we construct a new crystal database with a unified Wyckoff representation
(Supplementary Section 2.2).
2.2 Hierarchical UFO-MGen
Building on the stratified feature of Wyckoff space, UFO-MGen is designed as a
hierarchical generative framework that separately models the discrete and continu-
ous Wyckoff representation for crystal structure generation, as shown in Fig. 1. The
UFO-MGen architecture includes the three sequential stages: Stage I, hierarchical
topology selection (HTS); Stage II, chemical occupancy module (COM); and Stage III,
structured Wyckoff-aware generation (SWG). A detailed description of UFO-MGen is
provided in Supplementary Section 3.
Stage I of UFO-MGen begins by sampling a crystal scaffold that determines their
Wyckoff topology (e.g., G, K, and ω1:K), and define a topology scaffold τ = (G, K,
ω1:K) in Fig. 1(b) (Supplementary Section 3.1). Next, Stage II determines the chemical
occupancy of the predefined τ by assigning chemical species (s1:K) to the Wyckoff orbit
in τ under a set of chemical constrains (Supplementary Section 3.2). This assignment
constructs the full scaffold c = (G, K, ω1:K, s1:K), as illustrated in Fig. 1(c). Stage
III uses flow matching [30] to generate the continuous Wyckoff information (i.e., ℓ
and xorb) within a predetermined scaffold (c) (Fig. 1(d), Supplementary Section 3.3).
Finally, the complete crystal structure is reconstructed by inserting these continuous
variables into the corresponding Wyckoff templates and applying the associated space-
group symmetry operations (Fig. 1(e)).
Using the unified database of all 32,550 trainable structures, UFO-MGen is trained
to generate previously unreported crystal structures. Detailed training objectives and
sampling processes for each stage are provided in Supplementary Sections 3.4-3.6. The
generated crystals are then subjected to rigorous stability evaluations to assess the
performance of UFO-MGen.
2.3 Multi-stability evaluation
Traditional evaluations of crystal stability primarily rely on the formation energy
(∆Ef) or energy above the convex hull (∆Ehull) at zero K [31]. However, ∆Ef and
∆Ehull only measure thermodynamic stability and do not capture other important
physical stability, such as lattice-dynamic stability or finite-temperature thermal sta-
bility [32, 33]. Therefore, a more comprehensive and rigorous stability evaluation is
required to examine the stability of generated crystal structures.
In this work, we propose a multi-stability evaluation (MSE) framework based on
three physically rigorous criteria: thermodynamic, lattice-dynamical, and thermal sta-
bility (Fig. 1(e)). The thermodynamic stability is evaluated using the conventional
criteria of ∆Ef, where structures with ∆Ef < 0 are considered thermodynamically
stable (Fig. 2(a)). The lattice-dynamical stability is assessed from the phonon spec-
trum and density of states (DOS), where the structures without significant imaginary
frequencies are considered lattice-dynamically stable (Fig. 2(a)). In this work, the
structures with an integral of negative DOS below 0.05 phonon mode are considered as
4


lattice-dynamically stable. Finally, thermal stability is further examined using molec-
ular dynamics (MD) simulations at 300 K, where structures that retain their original
structures over 10 ps canonical ensemble (NVT) simulations are considered thermally
stable, see example of CeS2 in Fig. 2(b). To ensure robust and consistent evalua-
tions, MSE screening is performed using three universal machine-learning interatomic
potentials (uMLIPs), including CHGNet [34], MACE [35], and MatterSim [36].
Next, we use UFO-MGen to unconditionally generate 50,000 crystal structures and
then evaluate their stability using the MSE framework. The MSE screening results
show that all structures satisfy the thermodynamic stability criterion (∆Ef < 0),
while 13,326, 24,165, and 23,541 structures are identified as lattice-dynamically sta-
ble by CHGNet, MACE, and MatterSim, respectively (Fig. 2(a)). Subsequent MD
simulations at 300 K identify 12,744, 22,738, and 22,064 thermally stable structures
using these three uMLIPs, corresponding to overall MSE rates of 25.5%, 45.5%, and
44.1%. Chemical coverage analysis of these MSE-screened stable crystals reveal that
they span nearly all elements across the periodic table, as shown in Fig. 2(c). Fur-
thermore, their space-group distribution covers 34 of the 35 space groups represented
in the training dataset (Fig. 2(d)). These results demonstrate that UFO-MGen not
only generate crystals with rigorous physical stability but also produces chemically
and structurally diverse structures.
2.4 Extrapolation capability and validation
The large number of 195 space groups absent from our unified dataset provides a
unique opportunity to evaluate the extrapolation capability of UFO-MGen. Since
Stage I of UFO-MGen fixes the topology scaffold, we bypass this stage and use the
well-trained model to generate 33,439 crystal structures with previously unseen crystal
scaffolds. Following MSE screening, 5,921 generated crystals are fully stable, and sub-
sequent structural analysis shows that they span 107 of the 195 space groups absent
from the training set (bottom panel in Fig. 2(e)). To the best of our knowledge, such
extrapolation capability has not been demonstrated by existing crystal generative
models. These results suggest that extrapolation performance should be regarded as a
critical benchmark for evaluating the “true intelligence” of crystal generative models.
To validate the accuracy and physical stability of the generated crystals, first-
principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations [37, 38] were performed to
independently assess the MSE criteria of these structures from both interpolation and
extrapolation groups of UFO-MGen. Figure 2(f) summarizes six representative crys-
tals, three from interpolation and three from extrapolation, with different Drep values
(i.e., scaffold complexity). DFT structural relaxations show that the optimized lattice
parameters of these generated crystals are in excellent agreement with those predicted
by UFO-MGen (Supplementary Section 4.1). Moreover, DFT-calculated ∆Ef, phonon
spectra, and ab initio MD-simulated energy profiles are all consistent with the MSE
screening using uMLIPs (Supplementary Sections 4.1-4.3). Additional DFT validations
of other generated crystals also show excellent agreement with UFO-MGen predictions
(Supplementary Section 4.4). The strong agreement with quantum-accuracy DFT cal-
culations demonstrates the high accuracy and reliability of the UFO-MGen predictions
and further validates its ability to generate physically stable crystal structures.
5


2.5 Performance comparison
Using the more rigorous MSE framework, we benchmark UFO-MGen against several
state-of-the-art crystal generative models, including MatterGen [14], DiffCSP [21, 39],
FlowMM [40], SymmCD [27], and CDVAE [41]. To ensure a fair comparison, we retrain
UFO-MGen using MP20 dataset that was used to train prior generative models. We
then generate 300 crystal structures from each model and evaluate their stability using
the same MSE framework. As shown in Fig. 3(a), UFO-MGen achieves the highest
MSE success rate for every individual stability criteria, as well as the the highest overall
success rate, demonstrating its superior performance in generating physically stable
crystals. In addition to MSE, we further evaluate UFO-MGen using the widely adopted
SUN metric [14] based on 10,000 generated structures that satisfy the first MSE criteria
(∆Ef < 0). Fig. 3(b) shows that UFO-MGen again exhibits the highest SUN score of
31.2% among all models, which is also the highest reported SUN score to date. More
comprehensive benchmarks using other public metrics are presented in Supplementary
Section 5, where UFO-MGen consistently outperforms existing generative models.
Because UFO-MGen has demonstrated superior extrapolation capability, it is also
interesting to compare this capability against existing generative models. Different
from our processed database with unified Wyckoff representation, the original MP20
database contains 177 space groups, of which 53 are absent from this dataset. Next, we
regenerate 10,000 crystal structures for each generative model and quantify only the
coverage of space groups that are present (interpolation) and absent (extrapolation)
in the training data. Fig. 3(c) indicates that UFO-MGen achieves not only the highest
interpolation coverage rate, but also the highest extrapolation coverage rate of 45.3%
by generating 24 unseen space groups. In contrast, existing generative models exhibit
little or no extrapolation capability (Fig. 3(c)). This comparison further demonstrates
the superior performance of UFO-MGen in intelligent crystal generation.
To better understand the extrapolation capability of UFO-MGen, we performed
a t-SNE analysis [42] of the scaffold features based on all 10,000 generated crystals.
Crystal clusters belonging to known and unknown space groups exhibit large overlap
in the latent space (Fig. 3(d)), indicating that they share similar scaffold features,
such as Wyckoff positions, crystal systems, and lattice parameters. Owing to this large
overlap, structural information can be easily transferred between distinct scaffolds
through their continuous fibers, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 3(d), which possibly
explains the extrapolation capability of UFO-MGen.
2.6 Key Mechanisms of UFO-MGen
The superior performance of UFO-MGen can be ascribed to two unique mechanisms:(i)
the unified Wyckoff representation and (ii) the use of a flow-matching model. To quan-
titatively evaluate the importance of these mechanisms, we perform ablation studies
using three additional comparative models: (i) a flow-matching model trained on the
original MP database, (ii) a diffusion model trained on the original MP database,
and (iii) a diffusion model trained on our processed database with unified Wyckoff
representation.
6


Figure 4 compares the generation trajectories and associated energy profiles of two
representative material systems for the three ablation models and the full UFO-MGen.
For the simple ZnNi3 crystal with Drep = 3, the energy profile in Fig. 4(a) shows that
the full UFO-MGen generates a physically reliable crystal structure from the first gen-
eration step, followed by a smooth and nearly flat trajectory through the remaining
steps. In contrast, when trained on the original MP database, the energy profile first
increases and then decreases, indicating a less stable generation process. Although the
diffusion models eventually converge to a crystal structure similar to UFO-MGen, their
intermediate structures remain highly unrealistic during the early stages of genera-
tion. The schematic 3D energy landscapes and the corresponding principal component
(PC) trajectories in Fig. 4(b-c) clearly illustrate how UFO-MGen rapidly identifies
the physically accurate crystals and converges to the target structure, whereas other
three ablation models exhibit lower performance.
Furthermore, the advantages of UFO-MGen becomes even pronounced when gen-
erating the more complex Al3CrP4 crystal with Drep = 17 (Fig. 4(d)), as it directly
generates a physically reliable structure from the initial step and rapidly converges to
a low-energy state. The schematic 3D energy profile and corresponding PC projection
shown in Fig. 4(e-f) illustrate the efficiency of UFO-MGen in identifying the initial
structure and faster converging to the target structure. In contrast, the three ablation
models fail to generate initial structures and do not converge to the correct final con-
figurations. These ablation studies demonstrate that the combination of the unified
Wyckoff representation and flow-matching framework provides an effective strategy
for accurate and efficient crystal structure generation. Additional ablation tests are
provided in Supplementary Section 6, all of which demonstrate the advantages of the
hierarchical architecture of UFO-MGen.
2.7 Inverse materials design
Another key capability of start-of-the-art generative models is property-constrain gen-
eration for inverse materials design [14]. To this end, we introduce a fine-tuning module
to UFO-MGen and then evaluate its performance to generate crystal structures with
target properties. Since mechanical properties are important factors in the design of
next-generation materials for extreme environments [43, 44], we focus on three mechan-
ical properties: bulk modulus, shear modulus, and Young’s modulus. To quantify the
effective of fine-tuning, we use the base model to generate 540 crystals and adopt
fine-tuned UFO-MGen to generate 370 crystals with targeted high mechanical prop-
erties. Further details of the fine-tuning architectures and procedures are provided in
Supplementary Sections 7.1-7.2.
Figure 5(a) compares the distributions of crystals generated by the base UFO-
MGen and its fine-tuned version (i.e., UFO-Mech), using the mechanical extreme score
(Supplementary Section 7.2). A pronounced shift toward higher scores is observed
for the fine-tuned model, indicating an enhanced capability to generate target crystal
structures with superior mechanical properties. This improvement is further supported
by the shear-bulk modulus diagram in Fig. 5(b), where crystals generated by UFO-
Mech form a distinct red cluster with substantially higher bulk and shear moduli.
Compared with the existing materials known for their exceptional high mechanical
7


properties, such as cubic boron nitride (c-BN) [45], tungsten carbide (WC) [46], and
titanium diboride (TiB2) [47], predicted crystals located in the upper-right region
reaches values comparable to those of the benchmark materials. Extensive DFT
calculations further validate the accuracy of UFO-Mech in predicting the mechan-
ical properties of generated crystals (Supplementary Section 7.3). Together, these
results demonstrate the strong potential of the UFO-MGen for the inverse design of
mechanically robust materials.
More interestingly, we find that scaffold features play an important role in influ-
encing mechanical properties of materials. For instance, we extract one of the most
common scaffold feature, c = (Imm2, 4, 4d, 4d, 4d, 4d), from crystals within the red
cluster in Fig. 5(b) and impose this scaffold on 50 different materials to computer their
mechanical properties. As shown in Fig. 5(c), crystals adopting this scaffold exhibit
enhanced bulk, shear, and Young’s moduli, with average improvements ranging from
45% to 60% relative to their original structures. A representative example is BC3,
which exhibits exceptionally high mechanical properties (Fig. 5(b)). Notably, its scaf-
fold is very similar to that of WC, one of the strongest materials, indicating that the
exceptional mechanical properties of B3C may originate from these specific scaffold
characteristics (Fig. 5(d)).
We also test three additional scaffold features selected from the red cluster in
Fig. 5(b) and find that they can significantly enhance mechanical properties across
different materials (Supplementary Section 7.4). These results further demonstrate the
critical roles of crystal scaffolds in governing materials properties and inspire future
studies into scaffold-property relationships. Finally, although the present fine-tuning
model is designed to target mechanical properties, it can be easily extended to other
material properties. This capability highlights the broad applicability of UFO-MGen
as a general framework for property-constrained inverse materials design.
Supplementary information.
Supplementary information is available.
Acknowledgments.
J.Z. and C.H acknowledge the support of the National Science
Foundation under Grant No. 2556184. This research used resources of the National
Energy Research Scientific Computing Center (NERSC), a DOE Office of Science
User Facility supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy
under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231 using NERSC awards ERCAP0031213 and
ERCAP0035988. This work was also supported by a user project at the CNMS, a US
DOE Office of Science User Facility, operated at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
Contribution.
J.Z. developed UFO-MGen model, performed the ablation studies,
and fine-tuned the model for inverse materials design. O.C. and N.O. performed DFT
calculations to validate the predictions of UFO-MGen. C.H. supervised this work. All
authors contributed to the writing of the manuscript and agreed for publication.
Data availability.
The UFO-MGen model and datasets developed in this work are
available through our Github repository: https://github.com/huhuhhhh/UFO-MGen.
Declarations
The authors declare no conflict of interests.
8


References
[1] Peters, A.B., Zhang, D., Chen, S., Ott, C., Oses, C., Curtarolo, S., McCue, I.,
Pollock, T.M., Eswarappa Prameela, S.: Materials design for hypersonics. Nat.
Commun. 15(1), 3328 (2024)
[2] Ren, J., Zhang, Y., Zhao, D., Chen, Y., Guan, S., Liu, Y., Liu, L., Peng, S., Kong,
F., Poplawsky, J.D., et al.: Strong yet ductile nanolamellar high-entropy alloys
by additive manufacturing. Nature 608(7921), 62–68 (2022)
[3] Zhu, Y., Zhang, K., Meng, Z., Zhang, K., Hodgson, P., Birbilis, N., Weyland, M.,
Fraser, H.L., Lim, S.C.V., Peng, H., et al.: Ultrastrong nanotwinned titanium
alloys through additive manufacturing. Nat. Mater. 21(11), 1258–1262 (2022)
[4] Zinkle, S.J., Snead, L.L.: Designing radiation resistance in materials for fusion
energy. Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 44(1), 241–267 (2014)
[5] Zinkle, S.J., Busby, J.T.: Structural materials for fission & fusion energy. Mater.
Today 12(11), 12–19 (2009)
[6] Butler, K.T., Davies, D.W., Cartwright, H., Isayev, O., Walsh, A.: Machine
learning for molecular and materials science. Nature 559(7715), 547–555 (2018)
[7] Horton, M.K., Huck, P., Yang, R.X., Munro, J.M., Dwaraknath, S., Ganose, A.M.,
Kingsbury, R.S., Wen, M., Shen, J.X., Mathis, T.S., et al.: Accelerated data-
driven materials science with the Materials Project. Nat. Mater. 24(10), 1522–
1532 (2025)
[8] Griesemer, S.D., Xia, Y., Wolverton, C.: Accelerating the prediction of stable
materials with machine learning. Nat. Comput. Sci. 3(11), 934–945 (2023)
[9] Cheng, M., Fu, C.-L., Okabe, R., Chotrattanapituk, A., Boonkird, A., Hung,
N.T., Li, M.: Artificial intelligence-driven approaches for materials design and
discovery. Nat. Mater., 1–17 (2026)
[10] Lin, W., Jin, L., Jiang, Z., Cai, M., Lai, Z., Yurchenko, D., Yan, B., Zhou,
S., Novoselov, K.S., Liao, W.-H., et al.: Machine learning-based inverse design
for functional materials: Methods, challenges, and engineering applications. Adv.
Funct. Mater. 36(40), 75070 (2026)
[11] Pyzer-Knapp, E.O., Pitera, J.W., Staar, P.W., Takeda, S., Laino, T., Sanders,
D.P., Sexton, J., Smith, J.R., Curioni, A.: Accelerating materials discovery using
artificial intelligence, high performance computing and robotics. npj Comput.
Mater. 8(1), 84 (2022)
[12] Merchant, A., Batzner, S., Schoenholz, S.S., Aykol, M., Cheon, G., Cubuk, E.D.:
Scaling deep learning for materials discovery. Nature 624(7990), 80–85 (2023)
9


[13] Shen, J., Griesemer, S.D., Gopakumar, A., Baldassarri, B., Saal, J.E., Aykol, M.,
Hegde, V.I., Wolverton, C.: Reflections on one million compounds in the Open
Quantum Materials Database (OQMD). J. Phys. Mater. 5(3), 031001 (2022)
[14] Zeni, C., Pinsler, R., Z¨ugner, D., Fowler, A., Horton, M., Fu, X., Wang, Z.,
Shysheya, A., Crabb´e, J., Ueda, S., et al.: A generative model for inorganic
materials design. Nature 639(8055), 624–632 (2025)
[15] Okabe, R., Cheng, M., Chotrattanapituk, A., Mandal, M., Mak, K., C´ordova Car-
rizales, D., Hung, N.T., Fu, X., Han, B., Wang, Y., et al.: Structural constraint
integration in a generative model for the discovery of quantum materials. Nat.
Mater. 25(2), 223–230 (2026)
[16] Cheng, M., Luo, W., Tang, H., Yu, B., Cheng, Y., Xie, W., Li, J., Kulik, H.J., Li,
M.: Enhancing materials discovery with valence-constrained design in generative
modeling. Nat. Comput. Sci., 1–10 (2026)
[17] Park, H., Walsh, A.: Guiding generative models to uncover diverse and novel
crystals via reinforcement learning. Nat. Mach. Intell., 1–13 (2026)
[18] Luo, X., Wang, Z., Gao, P., Lv, J., Wang, Y., Chen, C., Ma, Y.: Deep learning
generative model for crystal structure prediction. npj Comput. Mater. 10(1), 254
(2024)
[19] Luo, X., Wang, Z., Wang, Q., Shao, X., Lv, J., Wang, L., Wang, Y., Ma, Y.: Crys-
talflow: a flow-based generative model for crystalline materials. Nat. Commun.
16(1), 9267 (2025)
[20] Kelvinius, F.E., Andersson, O.B., Parackal, A.S., Qian, D., Armiento, R., Lind-
sten, F.: WyckoffDiff: A generative diffusion model for crystal symmetry. Preprint
at https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.06485 (2025)
[21] Jiao,
R.,
Huang,
W.,
Lin,
P.,
Han,
J.,
Chen,
P.,
Lu,
Y.,
Liu,
Y.:
Crystal
structure
prediction
by
joint
equivariant
diffusion.
Preprint
at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.04475 (2023)
[22] Metni, H., Ruple, L., Walters, L.N., Torresi, L., Teufel, J., Schopmans, H.,
¨Ostreicher, J., Zhang, Y., Neubert, M., Koide, Y., et al.: Generative models for
crystalline materials. Adv. Mater. 38(18), 23620 (2026)
[23] Court, C.J., Yildirim, B., Jain, A., Cole, J.M.: 3-d inorganic crystal structure
generation and property prediction via representation learning. J. Chem. Inf.
Model. 60(10), 4518–4535 (2020)
[24] Hahn, T. (ed.): International Tables for Crystallography, Volume A: Space-Group
Symmetry, 5th edn. Springer, Dordrecht (2005)
10


[25] Kazeev, N., Nong, W., Romanov, I., Zhu, R., Ustyuzhanin, A.E., Yamazaki,
S., Hippalgaonkar, K.: Wyckoff Transformer: Generation of symmetric crystals.
Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.02407 (2025)
[26] Chang, R., Pak, A., Guerra, A., Zhan, N., Richardson, N., Ertekin, E., Adams,
R.: Space group equivariant crystal diffusion. NeurIPS 38, 72772–72805 (2026)
[27] Levy, D., Panigrahi, S.S., Kaba, S.-O., Zhu, Q., Lee, K.L.K., Galkin, M., Miret,
S., Ravanbakhsh, S.: Symmcd: Symmetry-preserving crystal generation with
diffusion models. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.03638 (2025)
[28] Steenrod, N.: The Topology of Fibre Bundles. Princeton Mathematical Series,
vol. 14. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey (1951)
[29] Jain, A., Ong, S.P., Hautier, G., Chen, W., Richards, W.D., Dacek, S., Cholia, S.,
Gunter, D., Skinner, D., Ceder, G., Persson, K.A.: Commentary: The Materials
Project: A materials genome approach to accelerating materials innovation. APL
Mater. 1(1), 011002 (2013)
[30] Lipman, Y., Chen, R.T.Q.C., Ben-Hamu, H., Nickel, M., Le, M.: Flow matching
for generative modeling. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.02747 (2022)
[31] Ma, J., Hegde, V.I., Munira, K., Xie, Y., Keshavarz, S., Mildebrath, D.T., Wolver-
ton, C., Ghosh, A.W., Butler, W.H.: Computational investigation of half-heusler
compounds for spintronics applications. Phys. Rev. B 95, 024411 (2017)
[32] Oyeniran, N., Das, S., Dumitrica, T., Ganesh, P., Sumpter, B.G., Huang, J., Kent,
P.R., Jakowski, J., Chen, Z., Unocic, R.R., et al.: First-principles investigation
of structure-property relationships in stable and metastable mxenes. Phys. Rev.
Mater. 10(6), 064001 (2026)
[33] Gu, J., Zhao, Z., Huang, J., Sumpter, B.G., Chen, Z.: MX anti-MXenes from
non-van der waals bulks for electrochemical applications: the merit of metallicity
and active basal plane. ACS Nano 15(4), 6233–6242 (2021)
[34] Deng, B., Zhong, P., Jun, K., Riebesell, J., Han, K., Bartel, C.J., Ceder, G.:
CHGNet as a pretrained universal neural network potential for charge-informed
atomistic modelling. Nat. Mach. Intell. 5, 1031–1041 (2023)
[35] Batatia, I., Kov´acs, D.P., Simm, G.N.C., Ortner, C., Cs´anyi, G.: MACE: Higher
order equivariant message passing neural networks for fast and accurate force
fields. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 11423–
11436 (2022)
[36] Yang, H., Hu, C., Zhou, Y., Liu, X., Shi, Y., Li, J., Li, G., Chen, Z., Chen,
S., Zeni, C., Horton, M., Pinsler, R., Fowler, A., Z¨ugner, D., Xie, T., Smith,
J., Sun, L., Wang, Q., Kong, L., Liu, C., Hao, H., Lu, Z.: MatterSim: A deep
11


learning atomistic model across elements, temperatures and pressures. Preprint
at https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.04967 (2024)
[37] Kresse, G., Furthm¨uller, J.: Efficiency of ab-initio total energy calculations for
metals and semiconductors using a plane-wave basis set. Comput. Mater. Sci.
6(1), 15–50 (1996)
[38] Kresse, G., Hafner, J.: Ab initio molecular dynamics for liquid metals. Phys. Rev.
B 47(1), 558 (1993)
[39] Jiao, R., Huang, W., Liu, Y., Zhao, D., Liu, Y.: Space group constrained crystal
generation. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03992 (2024)
[40] Miller,
B.K.,
Chen,
R.T.Q.,
Sriram,
A.,
Wood,
B.M.:
FlowMM:
Generating
materials
with
Riemannian
flow
matching.
Preprint
at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.04713 (2024)
[41] Xie, T., Fu, X., Ganea, O.-E., Barzilay, R., Jaakkola, T.: Crystal diffusion varia-
tional autoencoder for periodic material generation. In: International Conference
on Learning Representations (2022)
[42] Maaten, L.V.D., Hinton, G.: Visualizing data using t-SNE. J. Mach. Learn. Res.
9(Nov), 2579–2605 (2008)
[43] Eswarappa Prameela, S., Pollock, T.M., Raabe, D., Meyers, M.A., Aitkaliyeva,
A., Chintersingh, K.-L., Cordero, Z.C., Graham-Brady, L.: Materials for extreme
environments. Nat. Rev. Mater. 8, 81–88 (2023)
[44] Wyatt, B.C., Nemani, S.K., Hilmas, G.E., Opila, E.J., Anasori, B.: Ultra-high
temperature ceramics for extreme environments. Nat. Rev. Mater. 9, 773–789
(2024)
[45] Zhang, J.S., Bass, J.D., Taniguchi, T., Goncharov, A.F., Chang, Y.-Y., Jacobsen,
S.D.: Elasticity of cubic boron nitride under ambient conditions. J. Appl. Phys.
109(6), 063521 (2011)
[46] Brown, H.L., Armstrong, P.E., Kempter, C.P.: Elastic properties of some poly-
crystalline transition-metal monocarbides. J. Chem. Phys. 45(2), 547–549 (1966)
[47] Ledbetter, H., Tanaka, T.: Elastic-stiffness coefficients of titanium diboride. J.
Res. NIST 114(6), 333–339 (2009)
12


Fig. 1 Workflow of UFO-MGen for generating accurate crystal structures and predict-
ing their associated properties. (a) Wyckoff representation of crystal structure in latent space.
(b) Stage I: hierarchical topology section (HTS) for classifying crystal structures based on discrete
information: space group (G), number of Wyckoff orbits (K), and Wyckoff letter sequence (ω1:K)
using multilayer perceptron (MLP) network. The topology scaffold (τ) is a fused representation of
G, K and ω1:K. (c) Stage II: chemical occupancy module (COM) for assigning chemical species (s1:K)
to each τ to form complete scaffold c = (τ, s1:K) using chemical constrains. (d) Stage III: structured
Wyckoff-aware generation (SWG) for embedding the discrete scaffold and continuous fibers into hier-
archical flow matching model to predict the velocity. (e) Crystal structure generation by decoding the
output and multi-stability evaluation (MSE). (f) Fine-tuning of the UFO-MGen model for property-
constrained generation and inverse materials design.
13


Fig. 2
Mutli-stability evaluation (MSE) and extrapolation capability of UFO-MGen. (a)
Distribution of generated crystal structure according to their thermodynamic and lattice-dynamical
stabilities, screened using three universal machine learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs). Ther-
modynamically stable structures are identified by negative formation energies (∆Ef < 0), and
lattice-dynamically stable structures are identified by the absence of imaginary phonon frequencies,
quantified by an integral of imaginary phonon density of states (DOS) below 0.05 phonon modes. (b)
Thermal stability assessment of all stable structures that satisfy the first two stability criteria using
MLIP-based molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. Structures that maintain their initial configura-
tions throughout the 10 ps NVT simulations at 300 K are classified as thermally stable structure,
with CeS2 shown as a representative example. (c) Success rates for each MSE criteria and the overall
MSE success rate obtained using the three MLIPs. (d) Distribution of chemical elements represented
in the fully stable crystals predicted by CHGNet. (e) Distribution of space group represented in the
unified database, and in the interpolation and extrapolation predictions generated by UFO-MGen.
(f) Representative generated crystals with different complexity dimension Drep values, all of which
are validated by DFT calculations in Supplementary Section 4.1.
14


Fig. 3 Performance comparison between UFO-MGen and other generative models. (a)
Comparison of the MSE success rates achieved by UFO-MGen and other generative models. (b)
Comparison of the SUN rates achieved by UFO-MGen and other generative models. (c) Comparison
of the interpolation and extrapolation capabilities among different generative models. (d) Similarity
analysis of the scaffold features of 10,000 generated crystals visualized using t-SNE. The red color
represents the high similarity and blue color means low similarity. The right schematic illustrates
the extrapolation mechanism of UFO-MGen, in which crystals are generated by transferring similar
Wyckoff features across neighboring scaffold fibers associated with different space groups.
15


Fig. 4 Ablation studies on the performance of UFO-MGen for the importance of unified
Wyckoff representation and flow-matching. (a) Evolution of the total energy during the gen-
eration of a representative ZnNi3 system with a relatively simple crystal structure. Four generative
methods are compared: UFO-MGen, a diffusion model based on Wyckoff space, a flow-matching model
in native crystal space, and a diffusion model in native crystal space. The corresponding schematics
of three-dimensional (3D) energy trajectories and two-dimensional (2D) principal component (PC)
projections are shown on the right side of panel. (b) Evolution of the total energy during the gener-
ation of a representative Al3CrP4 system with a more complex crystal structure using the same four
generative methods. The corresponding 3D energy profile and 2D PC projections are shown on the
right side of the panel.
16


Fig. 5 Fine-tuning of UFO-MGen for property-constrained generations. (a) Distribution
of crystal structures generated by the base UFO-MGen model and the fine-tuned model (UFO-Mech),
evaluated using the mechanical extreme score defined based on the bulk modulus, shear modulus,
and Young’s modulus. (b) Distribution of crystal structures generated by both base and fine-tuned
models in the shear-bulk modulus diagrams, compared with representative known materials exhibiting
exceptional mechanical properties. To avoid inconsistencies between experimental measurements and
computational predictions, the mechanical properties of the known materials are recalculated using
the MatterSim for consistent comparison. (c) Percentage improvements in the mechanical properties
of 50 selected materials after imposing one of the most common scaffold features identified from the
red cluster in panel (b). (d) Schematic comparison of the scaffolds of two representative materials
with high mechanical properties: BC3, predicted by UFO-Mech, and WC, an existing materials known
for its high mechanical performance.
17


Supplementary Information
Topology-Stratified Materials Discovery with A Flow-based Generative Model
Jingyi Zhou1, Oyshee Chowdhury1, Noah Oyeniran1, Chongze Hu1,2
1. Department of Aerospace Engineering and Mechanics, The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa,
Alabama 35487, United States
2. Alabama Materials Institute, The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Alabama 35487, United
States
Contents
S1 Wyckoff Representation of Crystal Structures
3
S1.1 Original presentation of Wyckoff points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
S1.2 Crystal scaffolds and associated parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
S1.3 Database analysis using scaffold parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
S2 Stratified Wyckoff Space and Unification
9
S2.1 Wyckoff-stratified parameter space
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
S2.2 Unification of Wyckoff representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
S3 UFO-MGen Architecture and Training Objective
13
S3.1 Stage I: Hierarchical topology selection (HTS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
S3.2 Stage II: Chemical occupancy module (COM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
S3.3 Stage III: Structured Wyckoff-aware generation (SWG) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
S3.4 Training objective and loss decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
S3.5 Sampling procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
S3.6 Training and sampling pseudocode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
S4 DFT Validation of UFO-MGen Prediction
23
S4.1 DFT structural optimization and thermodynamic stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
S4.2 DFT validation of lattice-dynamic stability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
S4.3 AIMD validation of thermal stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
S4.4 DFT validation of additional generated crystals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
S4.5 Comparison with Baseline Generative Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
S5 Evaluation Metrics
30
S5.1 Public metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
S5.2 Interpolation and extrapolation metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
1


S6 Ablation Studies of UFO-MGen Performance
34
S6.1 Ablation test for Stage I: HTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
S6.2 Ablation test for Stage II: COM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
S6.3 Ablation test for Stage III: SWG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
S7 Inverse Materials Design
36
S7.1 Fine-tuning architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
S7.2 Mechanical property datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
S7.3 DFT validation of UFO-Mech . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
S7.4 Scaffold effect on mechanical properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
2


S1
Wyckoff Representation of Crystal Structures
The difficulty in crystal generation lies not merely in the joint modeling of atomic species, lattice
parameters, and fractional coordinates, but in the fact that the generation of real crystals does
not occur within a smooth, natural coordinate space [1, 2, 3]. Traditional representations depict
a crystal containing N atoms as a concatenation of lattice parameters and the coordinates of all
atoms; however, this approach suffers from two fundamental issues: (1) Due to symmetry, unit-cell
choices, origin choices, and atom-index permutations, a single physical crystal can correspond to a
multitude of distinct coordinate descriptions [4]; and (2) the orbit space corresponding to special
positions is not a smooth subset of ordinary Euclidean space, but rather exhibits hierarchical and
singular structures induced by site-symmetry enhancement and Wyckoff-position specialization [5].
Consequently, directly learning the generative distribution within this 3N + 6-dimensional degrees
of freedom (DOFs) space mixes symmetry equivalences, singular boundaries, and true DOF [6, 7, 8].
This paper addresses these challenges by mapping the naive crystal representation into a Wyckoff
representation based on the International Tables for Crystallography and standard crystallographic
orbit conventions [9, 10]. The advantages of this approach are twofold: it treats the independent
orbits—defined under the crystal’s space group—as the primary objects of interest, retaining only
the elemental species, Wyckoff letters, and free coordinates associated with each orbit [1, 9, 10].
This effectively compresses the dimensionality of the continuous representation from 3N + 6 to
a lower dimension, which is dominated by the number of independent orbits.
Furthermore, by
leveraging space group operations to naturally preserve crystal symmetry, this method allows for
the reconstruction of the complete crystal structure while shifting the metric of “complexity” away
from a simple count of atoms and toward the degrees of freedom that truly reflect the inherent
difficulty of the generative process [11, 12].
S1.1
Original presentation of Wyckoff points
A periodic crystal can be defined as:
C =
 M, {(si, xi)}N
i=1

,
(1)
where M ∈R3×3 is the lattice matrix, si is the atomic species of atom i, and xi ∈T3 = [0, 1)3 is its
fractional coordinate [1]. If the lattice matrix M is replaced by lattice parameters ℓ= (a, b, c, α, β, γ),
the system has 3N + 6 continuous degrees of freedom. However, for a given structure, the action
of the space group introduces significant redundancy through many equivalent coordinate sets;
furthermore, the arrangement of equivalent atoms within an orbit introduces additional internal
arrangement redundancy [9].
To eliminate this redundancy, we employ the concept of symmetry orbits under a space group
G. For a point x, its orbit under the space group G is
OrbG(x) = {g(x) mod Λ : g ∈G},
(2)
3


and its stabilizer is given by:
StabG(x) = {g ∈G : g(x) ≡x
(mod Λ)}.
(3)
A Wyckoff position is characterized by its site multiplicity (mk), which is determined by:
mk =
|G0|
|StabG(xk)|,
(4)
where k is Wyckoff orbit and xk is representative coordinate of the k-th Wyckoff orbit. Its number
of free parameters, dk, can be defined as:
dk = 3 −dim
 Fix(StabG(xk))

,
(5)
where dk ∈{0, 1, 2, 3} can be explained by the number of independent continuous parameters that
must be explicitly specified for that Wyckoff orbit k [5]. General Wyckoff positions typically exhibit
higher dk values, whereas highly symmetric special positions often lead to dk = 0. For instance,
Fig. S1.1(a) shows that the NaCl structure has dk = 0 for both Na and Cl because both atoms
occupy fixed high-symmetry Wyckoff positions. In contrast, Fig. S1.1(b) shows a more complex
material system, CaSnP2O7 with P21/c space group. In this structure, the symmetry-independent
atoms occupy general Wyckoff positions whose coordinate templates contain three free fractional
parameters (i.e., x, y and z, see Fig. S1.1(b)). As a result, the corresponding Wyckoff orbits have
dk = 3, leading to a higher-dimensional Wyckoff representation than the highly symmetric NaCl
crystal.
Following above procedures, we re-encode the original atom crystal representation into a Wyckoff
representation:
ϕ(C) =

G, ℓ, {(wk, sk, xfree
k
)}K
k=1

,
(6)
where G is the space group, ℓdenotes the symmetry-constrained lattice parameters, K is the number
of symmetry-independent Wyckoff orbits [10], wk is the Wyckoff letter, sk is the species assigned to
orbit k, and xfree
k
∈Tdk are the free coordinates of that Wyckoff orbit.
S1.2
Crystal scaffolds and associated parameters
The Wyckoff representation in Eq. 6 contains both discrete Wyckoff information (e.g., G, K, ω1:K,
s1:K, and others) and continuous parameters (e.g., ℓand xfree
k
). To separate the discrete and contin-
uous information, we define a crystal scaffold (c) to only represent the discrete Wyckoff information
only, and thus c can be expressed as:
c = (G, K, w1:K, s1:K)
(7)
which specifies the space group (G), the number of Wyckoff orbits (K), the Wyckoff-letter sequence
(ω1:K), and chemical species (s1:K) to each Wyckoff orbit (k).
Using this scaffold representation, we introduce a parameter, called scaffold intrinsic dimension
4


Figure S1.1: Workflow of transforming a three-dimensional crystal structure into the Wyckoff-space
encoded representation: (a) Wyckoff representation of cubic NaCl with space group Fm¯3m. The
high symmetry of NaCl crystal has 2 representative points (K = 2), 0 degrees of freedom (dk = 0),
and a lower Drep value of 1. (b) Wyckoff representation of monoclinic CaSnP2O7 with space group
P21/c. The more complex CaSnP2O7 crystal has 11 representative points (K = 11), 3 degrees of
freedom (dk = 3), and a higher Drep value of 37.
(Drep), to describe the space and complexity of a certain scaffold c:
Drep(c) = Dℓ(G) +
K
X
k=1
dk,
(8)
where Dℓ(G) is the number of independent lattice degrees of freedom allowed by the crystal system
of G. According to the ITA lattice constraints [1], Dℓhas following relations: Dℓ= 1 for cubic
systems, Dℓ= 2 for tetragonal, hexagonal, and trigonal systems, Dℓ= 3 for orthorhombic systems,
Dℓ= 4 for monoclinic systems, and Dℓ= 6 for triclinic systems. Since Drep directly quantifies the
number DOFs of a certain crystal structure in Wyckoff space, this parameter can be considered as
a core measure of the complexity of a crystal scaffold.
Based on the value of Drep, we can introduce another scaffold parameter, called compression
ratio (ρ) as:
ρ(c) = Drep(c)
3N + 6,
(9)
5


This quantity describes the extend to which crystal symmetry reduces the dimensionality of the
naive coordination representation. Accordingly, the Wyckoff representation reframes the concept
of “complexity”—shifting it from “how many atoms are present” to “how many independent orbits
exist, how many free parameters are associated with each orbit, and how many degrees of freedom
remain within the lattice itself.”
S1.3
Database analysis using scaffold parameters
To evaluate the efficiency of the proposed Wyckoff parameters (Drep and ρ) for representing the
crystal structures, we calculated both quantities for all structures in the Materials Project database
(v2026.03.15) [13]. This database contains 154,875 crystal structures with unit cells ranging from 1
to 444 atoms and their compositions spanning 89 chemical elements. It is worth noting that although
the MP database covers most of the chemical elements in periodic table, the element occurrence is
highly uneven, as shown in Fig. S1.2. For instance, common inorganic constituents such as O, Li,
Na, K, Ca, Fe, Si, F and Cl appear in many structures, whereas noble gases, radioactive elements
and several rare elements are weakly represented or absent.
After classifying these data points based on their Drep and ρ values, the total MP dataset yields
18,074 distinct scaffolds across 35 different space groups. We further select the trainable data points
based on three criteria: First, the corresponding structures can be successfully standardized and
encoded using the Wyckoff representation. Second, the scaffold contains no failed, duplicated, or
unstable encodings. Third, each scaffold has enough training examples. In the expanded setting, we
use trainable quantity ntrain ≥100 as the minimum support threshold. These criteria yield 32,550
crystal structures with 119 trainable scaffold features.
Based on these trainable scaffolds, we further analyze their structural characteristics and their
coverage of crystal structures and chemical elements. Figure S1.3(a) shows the scaffold-size dis-
tribution, where a small number of scaffolds contain hundreds to thousands of structures, whereas
most scaffolds are represented by only a few configurations. The 119 scaffolds used for training are
selected from the left region in Fig. S1.3(a), as they contain sufficient examples to reliably train the
UFO-MGen. In contrast, the remaining scaffolds contain insufficient examples for stable scaffold-
specific flow training and are therefore retained for dataset statistics and coverage analyses but are
not used as primary routes for continuous flow training.
The crystal structure distribution of the trainable scaffold is further analyzed in Fig. S1.3(b),
where the scaffolds are mapped onto the Drep −ρ space and colored based on their crystal systems.
Grey points denote all canonical scaffolds, while colored points denote the scaffolds selected for
training. The selected set covers all seven crystal systems and spans a broad range of representation
complexity and Wyckoff density. Thus, the trainable scaffold pool is not limited to the simplest
cases; it also includes high-complexity and weakly compressed regions, especially in monoclinic
and triclinic systems. Such a diverse distribution demonstrates that Drep and ρ parameters can
effectively capture the complexity of crystal structures in Wyckoff space, making them effective
descriptors for representing crystal structures in latent space.
Finally, we analyze the space-group distribution of the trainable scaffolds. Figure S1.3(c) sum-
marizes the distribution of the 119 trainable scaffolds across space groups. Although the training
6


Figure S1.2: Element coverage in the Materials Project dataset containing 154,875 crystal structures.
The dataset covers 89 elements, but the distribution is strongly imbalanced, with common inorganic
elements appearing much more frequently than noble gases, radioactive elements, and several rare
elements. Colors are shown on a logarithmic scale: dark blue indicates elements appearing in only a
few structures, green indicates intermediate-frequency elements, and yellow indicates highly frequent
elements appearing in tens of thousands of structures. Gray cells indicate elements absent from the
dataset.
dataset covers only 35 space groups, these space groups are broadly distributed across the full crys-
tallographic range from No. 1 to No. 230. This broad distribution ensures that Stage III is trained
across diverse symmetry regimes rather than being restricted to a narrow subset of common space
groups.
7


Figure S1.3: Trainable scaffold pool and long-tailed scaffolds distribution.
(a) Scaffold-support
distribution after Wyckoff encoding and canonicalization. The expanded corpus contains 18,074
canonical scaffolds, but most scaffolds are weakly supported, meaning that they contain only a
small number of structures. The 119 scaffolds selected for training lie in the high-support region
and satisfy the minimum support threshold ntrain ≥100. (b) Coverage of the trainable scaffolds
in the Drep −ρ complexity space. Grey points denote all canonical scaffolds, while colored points
denote the selected trainable scaffolds. Colors indicate crystal systems. The selected scaffolds span
both low- and high-complexity regions and cover all seven crystal systems. (c) Distribution of the
selected scaffolds over space groups. The trainable scaffold pool covers 35 space groups, with 119
selected scaffolds in total. The vertical bars show the number of selected scaffolds associated with
each space group, and colors again indicate crystal systems.
8


S2
Stratified Wyckoff Space and Unification
This section explains why crystal generation in Wyckoff space is not naturally defined on a single
smooth manifold. The key point is that high-symmetry atomic positions create lower-dimensional
geometric limits, while different scaffolds induce different continuous fibers. Together, these three
facts motivate the formulation of UFO-MGen as a multi-stage frameworks to handle the non-smooth
manifold of crystal structure generation in Wyckoff space.
S2.1
Wyckoff-stratified parameter space
Conventional generative modeling is typically formulated on a fixed-dimensional smooth space,
such as an Euclidean space or a single Riemannian manifold [14, 15]. However, this assumption
is not valid for crystal generation. This is because even when the space group and the scaffold
are fixed, the Wyckoff crystal parameter space is not globally smooth.
As continuous Wyckoff
coordinates approach special positions, the local site symmetry increases and the number of free
degrees of freedom decreases, leading to changes in the dimensionality of the representation space.
As a result, the Wyckoff representation space is more appropriate to define as a union of multiple
smooth manifolds with different dimensions, rather than a single smooth manifold. Accordingly,
the effective Wyckoff representation for a fixed scaffold (c) can be expressed as:
W(c) = Wraw(c) \
 Wspec(c) ∪Wcoll(c)

,
(10)
where Wraw is the raw Wyckoff space, Wspec denotes the special subset of Wraw, and Wcoll denotes
the the collision subset of Wraw.
More specifically, the Wspec corresponds to cases where free
parameters at special positions with high symmetry (e.g., x = 0 or x = y). The Wcoll corresponds
to cases where orbit distances are too short and hence can consider atoms collide.
The continuous nature of Wyckoff space has important implications for generative modeling of
crystal structures, as special Wyckoff positions must be treated explicitly. For instance, Fig. S2.1(a)
shows that when the entire Wyckoff space is treated as an ordinary Euclidean space [2], symmetry-
induced singularities may be incorrectly interpreted as noise, thereby obscuring the physical signif-
icance of special Wyckoff positions such as (x = 0.5 and y = 0.5). Figure S2.1(b) further illustrates
the physical constraint that atoms cannot overlap or approach each other too closely, thereby ex-
cluding physically invalid configurations from the accessible Wyckoff space.
To address this issue, we adopt a stratified framework for continuous generation, which trans-
forms the continuous Wyckoff parameters from a base distribution to the data distribution within a
fixed scaffold (c). The resulting dynamics are defined only on the smooth and physically valid region
of each scaffold parameter space, while the excluded lower-dimensional subsets are interpreted as
geometric limits corresponding to symmetry-specialized Wyckoff strata or physically invalid collision
configurations.
9


Figure S2.1: Representation of discontinuous features in Wyckoff space that needs a stratified
framework to treat discontinuous and continuous features.
(a) Special position treatment.
(b)
Collision treatment.
10


S2.2
Unification of Wyckoff representation
Conventional generative models, such as diffusion and flow matching [3, 8, 16, 17], generally assume
that crystal structures can be represented on a single smooth manifold. However, this assumption
does not hold true for the Wyckoff representation, where different scaffolds have different number
of continuous DOFs and are connected through discontinuous symmetry transitions. For instance,
statistical analysis of the distribution of Drep of all crystal structures in MP data suggest that about
89% of sampled scaffold pairs have different representation dimensions. This clearly demonstrates
that a single fixed-dimensional intrinsic manifold is not a good model for the crystal generation
process, which also demonstrates the importance of adopting Wyckoff unification to process the
crystal data [8].
In this work, we introduce the concept of “unified Wyckoff representation” that provides a co-
herent description of the stratified Wyckoff space.
Specifically, each scaffold (c) defines a local
continuous manifold, referred as a fiber (F), that contains all continuous crystal structure informa-
tion, such as lattice variables (ℓ) and free Wyckoff coordinates (xorb). Since fibers corresponding
to different scaffolds generally have different dimensions, they need to be connected through lower-
dimensional boundary regions representing special Wyckoff positions. Rather than treating these
special configurations as disconnected states, the topological fiber bundle theory [18] provides a
natural framework for interpreting them as boundary connections between neighboring fibers of dif-
ferent dimensions. A rigorous mathematical formulation and proof of this concept will be presented
in a separate study. Briefly speaking, this process unifies the description of both continuous struc-
tural variations within a scaffold and discrete transitions between different scaffolds, enabling crystal
structures with different crystallographic representations to be modeled within a single framework,
see Fig. S2.2.
Beyond crystallographic constraints, physical constraints such as atomic overlap, geometric va-
lidity, and energy stability further modify the topology of each fiber by excluding physically inac-
cessible regions. We refer to these topology changes as physically variable topology. Within each
valid fiber, local structural variations are described using a Riemannian metric that measures how
infinitesimal changes in lattice parameters and Wyckoff coordinates affect the crystal geometry. To-
gether, the global unification framework captures the connectivity among different crystallographic
manifolds, while the local Riemannian geometry characterizes structural variations within each
manifold, providing a unified mathematical description of crystal generation in Wyckoff space.
The critical role of the unified Wyckoff representation have been systematically evaluated through
ablation studies, as shown in main-text Fig. 4. For isntance, the UFO-MGen significantly outper-
forms its counterparts trained on the MP databases without the unified Wyckoff representation.
11


Figure S2.2: Unification of Wyckoff space. For each scaffold, the special positions in its continuous
fibers will be processed as the boundary of the fibers and connect with other fibers more smoothly.
Such an unification can be extended to the entire Wyckoff space characterized by the Drep values.
12


S3
UFO-MGen Architecture and Training Objective
Architecture of UFO-MGen: Owing to the stratified Wyckoff space, we design the UFO-MGen as
a hierarchical crystal generation process consisting of three stages: (i) Stage I: hierarchical topology
selection (HTS), (ii) Stage II: chemical occupancy module (COM), and (iii) Stage III: Structured
Wyckoff-aware generation (SWG), as illustrated in Fig. S3.1. We briefly discuss the three stages
below.
Figure S3.1: Workflow of UFO-MGen with three key stages: Stage I: hierarchical topology selection
(HTS) for topology-fixed scaffold (τ) prediction; Stage II: chemical occupancy module (COM) for
assigning chemical species to τ to generate complete scaffold (c); and Stage III: Structured Wyckoff-
aware generation (SWG) for using flow matching model to generate the continues lattice parameters
and Wyckoff coordination that was finally used for crystal structure predictions (CSP).
Stage I is motivated by the stratified features of Wyckoff space, in which the crystallographic
topology is determined before chemical species are assigned to each Wyckoff orbit. Specifically,
discrete Wyckoff parameters such as space group (G), number of Wyckoff orbits (K), Wyckoff letter
(ω1:K), define a topology-only scaffold, while the chemical species (s1:K) are introduced later in Stage
II. Since the full scaffold defined in Eq. (7) contains both crystallographic topology and orbit-level
chemistry, we separate its topology-only part (τ) as:
τ = (G, K, w1:K).
(11)
The motivation to define τ is that, once the scaffold c is determined, the continuous variables lie in
the corresponding smooth fiber W0(c), which contains the valid ℓand xfree
k
for that scaffold. This
geometric decomposition motivates the design of hirarchical design of UFO-MGen: the model first
selects a discrete scaffold c, thereby selecting the target fiber, and then learns a continuous flow
only within W0(c). In this way, UFO-MGen avoids learning a single continuous flow over a mixture
of fibers with different dimensions and topological structures.
Stage II applies a chemical constrains based on the species occupancy on each orbits to improve
the accuracy.
The species assignment follows several physical and chemical constrains, such as
charge balance, neural balance, and others to ensure the reasonable chemical occupation at each
specific Wyckoff orbit site.
Stage III integrates lattice variables together with the Wyckoff free coordinates to define the
13


continuous crystal geometry. Flow-matching is incorporated in Stage III to generate continuous
fibers, which are then combined with the complete scaffolds obtained from Stage II to reconstruct
the corresponding 3D crystal structures.
Probability propagation in UFO-MGen: Based on the architecture of UFO-MGen discussed
above, the overall probability p(τ, s1:k, ξ | y) can be defined using the three-stage factorization:
p(τ, s1:K, ξ | y) = πα(τ | y) pϕ(s1:K | τ, y) pθ(ξ | τ, s1:K, y).
(12)
Here y is the the input for UFO-MGen as shown in Fig. S3.1, which contains basic information of
a crystal, such as chemical species (s1:K), total number of atoms (N), and others. Stage I learns
πα(τ | y), the route-aware topology selector. Stage II learns pϕ(s1:K | τ, y), the chemical occupancy
module (COM). Stage III learns pθ(ξ | τ, s1:K, y), the structured Wyckoff-aware generator, and ξ is
the coordination representation that combines ℓand xorb:
ξ = (ℓ, xorb)
(13)
Loss functions of UFO-MGen: Based on the Fig. S3.1, the overall loss of the entire framework
can be simply expressed as:
LUFO = LI + λCOMLII + λCFMLIII.
(14)
where LI, λCOMLII, and λCFMLIII are the loss of Stage I (Eq. 17), II (Eq. 20), and III (Eq. 25),
respectively. In the following sections, we described the detailed architecture of each stage and the
corresponding loss functions used to train models.
S3.1
Stage I: Hierarchical topology selection (HTS)
S3.1.1
Architecture of Stage I
The main target of Stage I is to predict the topology scaffold, τ (Eq. 11), of a crystal in the
Wyckoff parameter space from the input composition y, where y is a 125-dimensional feature vector
constructed from the target chemical formula:
y = [felem, log(1 + natoms), batoms]
(15)
where felem ∈R120 is the element-fraction vector over the fixed element vocabulary, log(1 + natoms)
is a scalar that represents the total number of atoms, and batoms ∈R4 is a one-hot atom-count
bucket feature.
In addition to predicting τ, Stage I is designed to use a two-layers MLP with hidden dimension
of 256 to learn the basic structural relationships among crystal scaffolds underlying the unified
Wyckoff parameter space. By learning this unified space, UFO-MGen distinguishes crystals with
different Drep values and learns their corresponding topological features, providing a shared feature
14


Figure S3.2: Workflow of UFO-MGen Stage I for hierarchical topological selection (HTS).
space for the hierarchical prediction of the topology scaffold τ. Therefore, it is more efficient than
learning within the traditional atom-by-atom learning space.
The topology labels used for training are obtained from dataset unification process, as discussed
in Section S2. During this step, topology scaffold features belonging to the special Wspec are exam-
ined according to hierarchical ordering G →K →w1:K, with following hierarchical factorization:
πα(τ | y) = πα(G | y) πα(K | G, y) πα(w1:K | G, K, y),
(16)
where πα is a conditional distribution. If the re-encoding criteria are satisfied, a boundary con-
figuration associated with a high-dimensional topology scaffold is re-encoded as the corresponding
low-dimensional topology scaffold. Otherwise, the structure is labeled as boundary-ambiguous. The
resulting canonicalized topology scaffolds serve as the training targets for Stage I.
The MLP learns the mapping from the input composition to the topology features used to predict
G, K, and ω1:K. The auxiliary route helps separate different topology scaffolds in the feature space
and improves scaffold predicted ability.
S3.1.2
Loss function of Stage I
Based on the architecture of Stage I shown in Fig. S3.2, the overall loss function of stage I (LI) can
be determined as:
LI = LG + LK + Lw + λstateLstate + λspecLspec + λambLamb
(17)
where Lstate is the model explicitly distinguishes between the three states, Lspec is used for mapping
to low-dimensional topology scaffolds, Lamb handles boundary structures.
15


S3.2
Stage II: Chemical occupancy module (COM)
S3.2.1
Architecture of Stage II
Stage II is a Chemical Occupancy Module (COM) that assigns chemical species s1:K to the Wyckoff
orbits of the specific topology scaffold τ. This assignment is designed to satisfy the target com-
position, the Wyckoff multiplicities (mk), and basic chemical priors. Once COM is complete, the
full scaffold, c, as defined in Eq. (7) is obtained. The completed scaffold c is then passed to Stage
III, where it identifies the corresponding Wyckoff fiber Fc and serves as the basis for generating the
geometric features of the crystal.
Figure S3.3: Workflow of UFO-MGen Stage II for chemical occupancy module (COM). This stage
is designed to assign the chemical species at each Wyckoff orbit on the top of the scaffold.
Fig. S3.3 illustrates the detailed architecture of Stage II for COM. Conditioned on the topology-
only scaffold τ = (G, K, w1:K) predicted by Stage I, COM assigns s1:K to the Wyckoff orbits in
an autoregressive manner, thereby constructing the full scaffold c = (τ, s1:K). Accordingly, the
conditional probability distribution learned by COM (pϕ) is factorized as:
pϕ(s1:K | τ, y) =
K
Y
k=1
pϕ(sk | s1:k−1, τ, y, Rk−1),
(18)
where Rk−1 is the residual composition budget after assigning the first k −1 orbits. If Wyckoff orbit
k has multiplicity mk, assigning species sk contributes mk atoms of that element to the unit-cell
composition.
To determine the chemical occupancy of each Wyckoff orbit, COM integrates three groups of
information, including (i) global composition feature y, (ii) topology features, such as G, K, w1:K,
mk, and orbit degrees of freedom, and (iii) autoregressive history and residual budget Rk−1. For
each candidate chemical species (s), it can be represented by a hybrid element embedding:
eint(s) = [elearn(s) ∥fphys(s)],
(19)
16


where elearn(s) is a a trainable element embedding learned during Stage-II training, fphys(s) contains
fixed chemical descriptors such as periodic-table group, electronegativity, common oxidation states,
ionic or covalent radius, and valence information. These descriptors are used as statistical chemical
priors that guide the occupancy assignment, rather than imposing explicit quantum-mechanical
constraints.
S3.2.2
Loss functions of Stage II
Based on the COM architecture shown in Fig. S3.3, the overall loss function of COM is defined as:
LII = Lsp + λcompLcomp + λCB eECB + λradLrad
(20)
where the first term Lsp is the species-assignment negative log-likelihood, which can be determined
by Lsp = −log pϕ(s1:K | τ, y); the second term Lcomp is penalizes violations; the third term λCB eECB
is a relaxed charge-balance penalty; and last term λradLrad is a weak radius-compatibility penalty,
which is determined by Lrad = PK
k=1 Erad(sk, wk).
S3.2.3
Chemical constrains
The charge-balance prior is based on:
K
X
k=1
mkqk = 0,
(21)
where qk is an oxidation state assigned to species sk. This should not be treated as a universal hard
rule. It is useful for many ionic compounds, but it may not apply cleanly to metals, intermetallics,
or strongly covalent systems. We therefore use the relaxed form:
eECB =
min
˜q1,...,˜qK
 K
X
k=1
mk˜qk
!2
+ λox
K
X
k=1
min
q∈OxStates(sk)(˜qk −q)2.
(22)
Here ˜qk is a continuous relaxed oxidation state and OxStates(sk) is the candidate oxidation-state
set for element sk. The weight λCB can be reduced or set to zero for systems where oxidation-state
models are not appropriate.
S3.3
Stage III: Structured Wyckoff-aware generation (SWG)
S3.3.1
Architecture of Stage III
Stage III is responsible for generating the continuous Wyckoff parameters ξ, defined in Eq. (12),
based on the complete scaffold c. Once the discrete scaffold has been determined by Stage I and
II, the corresponding Wyckoff fiber Fc is uniquely specified, and the remaining task is to generate
the continuous parameter distribution associated with each scaffold lies on a smooth manifold,
while different scaffolds correspond to different fibers with distinct topologies.
To model these
heterogeneous continuous distribution efficiently, Stage III employs a share neural network whose
latent space is conditioned by the discrete scaffold.
17


The continuous parameters ξ are generated using conditional flow matching [17, 19], a generative
framework that learns a continuous-time transport from a simple base distribution to the target
data distribution by regressing a velocity field along interpolation paths. In this framework, the
flow model learns a time-dependent velocity field vθ(ξt, t, c, y) that transports samples from the
base distribution to the data distribution of continuous Wyckoff parameters associated with the
fixed scaffold. The corresponding continuous dynamics are given by:
dξt
dt = vθ(ξt, t, c, y),
t ∈[0, 1],
(23)
The scaffold c conditions the velocity field by specifying the target Wyckoff fiber, while ξt evolves
only through the continuous lattice and orbit-coordinate variables. As a result, Stage III is only
used to generate continuous features of the crystal (ℓand xorb), while keep all the discrete features
of a crystal fixed. The important modes included in Stage III are discussed below.
Figure S3.4: Workflow of UFO-MGen Stage III for structured Wyckoff-aware generation (SWG)
using flow matching generative model.
Because different scaffolds contain different numbers of Wyckoff orbits and different numbers
of free coordinates per orbit, the padded state representation contains many entries that do not
correspond to real continuous variables. To enable a single neural network to process all scaffolds,
Stage III introduces scaffold-specific masks that identify the valid degrees of freedom while ignoring
padded entries. As a result, the same fixed-size tensor can represent crystals with different intrinsic
dimensions.
Stage III employs two complementary masks.
The orbit activity mask, (Mact(c) ∈0, 1O),
identifies which padded orbit slots correspond to real Wyckoff orbits in scaffold (c). This mask
is applied in the Transformer so that attention is computed only among active orbits, while padded
or inactive orbits are completely ignored.
The orbit coordinate mask, (Morb(c) ∈0, 1O×dmax),
18


specifies which coordinate dimensions are valid free parameters for each active orbit. During velocity
prediction, this mask forces all invalid or padded coordinates to have zero velocity and excludes them
from the training loss.
For example, a fixed Wyckoff position has no free coordinates and therefore an all-zero coordinate
mask, whereas an orbit with one or three free coordinates activates only the corresponding entries.
Consequently, different Wyckoff positions can be represented using the same padded tensor without
introducing invalid degrees of freedom. Together, the activity and coordinate masks allow a shared
Stage III architecture to operate efficiently across all scaffolds while ensuring that only physically
meaningful continuous variables participate in prediction and optimization.
S3.3.2
Relation to the Wyckoff fiber
For a fixed scaffold c, the active part of ξt is a point in the padded coordinate chart of scaffold-
specific fiber W0(c) at certain time t. Throughout the ODE trajectory, Stage III remains confined
to this fiber and does not move samples between different fibers in the total Wyckoff Space, W(c).
Therefore, the vector field only evolves on the continuous coordinates that are valid for the selected
scaffold.
This design differs from atom-wise crystal generators that predict all atomic coordinates in the
full unit cell [6, 8]. In contrast, Stage III in our UFO-MGen framework predicts the independent
orbit-level free coordinates (xorb) and then reconstructs the full crystal using Wyckoff coordinate
templates and space-group operations. As a result, crystal symmetry is imposed by the representa-
tion during generation, rather than recovered after unconstrained atom-wise generation.
S3.3.3
Decoding for crystal structure prediction
The output of Stage III is the final continuous parameter ξ1 = (ℓ1, xorb
1 ), see Fig. S3.4. Together with
the scaffold c from Eq. (7), this parameter is decoded into a crystal structure. The lattice variables
are mapped back to physical lattice parameters. The orbit-level free coordinates are inserted into
the corresponding Wyckoff coordinate templates. Space-group operations then generate the full set
of atoms in the unit cell.
Because the ODE is integrated with a finite number of steps, small numerical deviations can oc-
cur. Lattice projection and symmetry refinement are applied as numerical cleanup. These steps are
not additional generative stages; they only enforce numerical consistency of the decoded structure.
S3.3.4
Loss functions of Stage III
Stage III is trained with a flow-matching velocity regression loss, following the structured vector
field in Fig. S3.4. For a sampled flow time (t), the target velocity is decomposed into lattice and
orbit-coordinate components:
u = (uℓ, uorb)
(24)
corresponding to the same decomposition ξ = (ℓ, xorb). The overall Stage-III loss is
LIII = Lℓ+ Lorb
(25)
19


The reported runs use equal weight for the lattice and orbit terms. Thus no additional coefficient
is placed between Lℓand Lorb. The lattice loss is
Lℓ=
 ˙ℓθ(ξt, t, c, y) −uℓ
2
2 .
(26)
The orbit loss is masked:
Lorb =
Morb(c) ⊙
 ˙xorb
θ
(ξt, t, c, y) −uorb2
2
∥Morb(c)∥1 + ϵ
.
(27)
Here ϵ = 10−6. This normalization keeps the loss scale comparable across scaffolds with different
numbers of active orbit degrees of freedom.
S3.4
Training objective and loss decomposition
Since UFO-MGen adopts a hierarchical architecture (Fig. S3.1), the three stages can be trained
independently or jointly fine-tuned after pretraining. As a result, the overall objective in Equa-
tion (14) of LUFO does not require every training run to backpropagate through all three stages at
once.
For Stage I, the objective is to learn the topology selector πα(τ | y). It is trained with super-
vised classification losses for the space group, orbit count, and Wyckoff sequence, together with an
auxiliary route-role loss. For Stage II, the objective is to learn the chemical occupancy distribution
pϕ(s1 | τ, y). COM is trained with the species-assignment loss and auxiliary penalties enforcing
composition consistency and weak chemical priors. For Stage III, a training sample is (c, ξ1), where
ξ1 = (ℓ1, xorb
1 ). We draw t ∼U(0, 1) and a base sample ξ0 = (ℓ0, xorb
0 ).
The lattice bridge uses a Gaussian base and Euclidean interpolation in normalized lattice space:
ℓ0 ∼N(0, I),
ℓt = (1 −t)ℓ0 + tℓ1,
uℓ= ℓ1 −ℓ0.
(28)
This interpolation is an engineering choice in normalized lattice-parameter space. It is not claimed
to be a geodesic on the full lattice manifold.
The orbit bridge uses a uniform base on the torus:
xorb
0
∼U[0, 1),
(29)
with wrapped displacement
∆wrap(x1, x0) = wrap[−1/2,1/2)(x1 −x0).
(30)
The interpolated orbit state and target velocity are
xorb
t
= wrap[0,1)

xorb
0
+ t∆wrap(x1, x0)

,
uorb = ∆wrap(x1, x0).
(31)
This bridge is defined for free fractional coordinates. The discontinuity at the wrap boundary is a
20


measure-zero issue and is not observed as a practical training problem.
S3.5
Sampling procedure
Given a composition-side condition y, UFO-MGen samples in three stages. First, Stage I samples
or ranks topology-fixed scaffolds τ as:
τ ∼πα(τ | y).
(32)
The auxiliary route role can be used for ranking or filtering, but it is not part of the scaffold. Second,
Stage II samples species assignments using Eq. (18), which gives:
sk ∼pϕ(sk | s1:k−1, τ, y, Rk−1).
(33)
After assigning sk, the residual budget is updated as:
Rk = Rk−1 −mke(sk),
(34)
where e(sk) is the one-hot count vector for element sk. A hard composition mask can be used to
prevent choices that make impossible.
After Stage II, the full scaffold c = (τ, s1:K) is fixed. Stage III initializes
ℓ0 ∼N(0, I),
xorb
0
∼U[0, 1).
(35)
The ODE is then integrated as
dℓt
dt = ˙ℓθ(ξt, t, c),
(36)
dxorb
t
dt
= Morb(c) ⊙˙xorb
θ
(ξt, t, c).
(37)
The current implementation uses 48-step explicit Euler integration. With ∆t = 1/48, the update is
ℓt+∆t = ℓt + ∆t ˙ℓt,
(38)
xorb
t+∆t = wrap[0,1)

xorb
t
+ ∆t Morb(c) ⊙˙xorb
t

.
(39)
The modulo-one wrapping in Eq. (39) is applied after every step. Inactive dimensions are kept fixed
by the mask.
The final state ξ1 = (ℓ1, xorb
1 ) is decoded together with scaffold c to form a crystal structure.
Lattice projection and symmetry refinement may be applied as numerical cleanup. They are not
additional generative stages.
21


S3.6
Training and sampling pseudocode
Algorithm S3.1 UFO-MGen training procedure
Input: training set Dtrain
Output: trained parameters α, ϕ, θ
1: Encode each crystal as (y, τ, s1:K, c, ξ1), where c = (τ, s1:K) and ξ1 = (ℓ1, xorb
1
).
2: for mini-batches B ⊂Dtrain do
3:
Predict ( ˆG, ˆK, ˆω1: ˆ
K, ˆr) ←fα(y).
4:
Compute LI using Eq. (17).
5:
Update α using AdamW on LI.
6: end for
7: for mini-batches B ⊂Dtrain do
8:
for all (τ, y, s1:K) ∈B do
9:
Initialize R0 ←R(y).
10:
for k = 1, . . . , K do
11:
Evaluate pϕ(sk | s1:k−1, τ, y, Rk−1) with teacher forcing.
12:
Update Rk ←Rk−1 −mke(sk).
13:
end for
14:
end for
15:
Compute LII using Eq. (20).
16:
Update ϕ using AdamW on LII.
17: end for
18: for mini-batches B = {(ci, ξi,1)}B
i=1 do
19:
Sample ti ∼U(0, 1) and ξi,0 ∼pci
0 .
20:
Build ξi,t and target velocities using Eqs. (28)–(31).
21:
Evaluate ˆvi ←vθ(ξi,t, ti, ci).
22:
Compute LIII using Eq. (25).
23:
Update θ using AdamW on LIII.
24: end for
25: return α, ϕ, θ.
Algorithm S3.2 UFO-MGen sampling procedure
Input: composition-side condition y, trained parameters α, ϕ, θ
Output: generated crystal structure ˆC
1: Sample or rank τ = (G, K, w1:K) ←Select(πα(τ | y)).
2: Initialize residual composition budget R0 ←R(y).
3: for k = 1, . . . , K do
4:
Sample sk ∼pϕ(sk | s1:k−1, τ, y, Rk−1).
5:
Update Rk ←Rk−1 −mke(sk).
6: end for
7: Form the complete scaffold c ←(τ, s1:K).
8: Sample ℓ0 ∼N(0, I) and xorb
0
∼U[0, 1).
9: Set ξ0 ←(ℓ0, xorb
0
) and ∆t ←1/T.
10: for i = 0, . . . , T −1 do
11:
Set ti ←i/T.
12:
Evaluate ( ˙ℓi, ˙xorb
i
) ←vθ(ξti, ti, c).
13:
Update ℓti+1 ←ℓti + ∆t ˙ℓi.
14:
Update xorb
ti+1 ←wrap[0,1)(xorb
ti
+ ∆t Morb(c) ⊙˙xorb
i
).
15:
Set ξti+1 ←(ℓti+1, xorb
ti+1).
16: end for
17: Decode ˆC ←Decode(c, ξ1).
18: Apply lattice projection and symmetry refinement as numerical cleanup.
19: return ˆC.
22


S4
DFT Validation of UFO-MGen Prediction
First-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations are performed to validate the predictive
performance of UFO-MGen. All DFT calculations are performed using Vienna Ab initio Simulation
Package (VASP) [20, 21]. The projector augmented-wave (PAW) method was employed together
with the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange–correlation functional within the generalized
gradient approximation (GGA) [22, 23]. A plane-wave energy cutoff of 500 eV is employed for all
DFT calculations, together with a dense Γ-centered k-point mesh to ensure numerical convergence.
Full structural optimization are performed by relaxing the lattice parameters and atomic positions
until the total energy and atomic force satisfy the specific convergence criteria of 1 × 10−5 eV
and 0.1 eV Å−1, respectively. Using the DFT-optimized structures, physical stability calculations
are subsequently carried out for the generated crystal structures from both the extrapolation and
interpolation groups following the multi-stability evaluation (MSE) framework discussed in main-
text Section 2.3.
S4.1
DFT structural optimization and thermodynamic stability
We first validate the generated candidates from both the interpolation and extrapolation groups
presented in the main text by comparing their lattice parameters and formation of energy (∆Ef).
Table S4.1 summaries the DFT-optimized lattice parameters and ∆Ef with the corresponding
UFO-MGen predictions for the six representative material systems shown in main-text Fig. 2(f).
Table S4.1: DFT-calculated formation energy (∆Ef) and optimized lattice parameters (a, b, c, α, β, γ) of
the six representative crystals shown in main-text Fig. 2(f), compared with the corresponding UFO-MGen
predictions.
Materials
∆Ef
a (Å)
b (Å)
c (Å)
α (◦)
β (◦)
γ (◦)
ScGa3 (UFO-MGen)
-0.516
4.12
4.12
4.12
90.00
90.00
90.00
ScGa3 (DFT)
-0.492
4.13
4.13
4.13
90.00
90.00
90.00
YGa3 (UFO-MGen)
-0.559
6.26
6.26
4.62
90.00
90.00
120.00
YGa3 (DFT)
-0.545
6.27
6.27
4.59
90.00
90.00
120.00
KLiSe (UFO-MGen)
-1.213
4.53
4.53
7.30
90.00
90.01
90.00
KLiSe (DFT)
-1.221
4.53
4.53
7.29
90.00
90.00
90.00
Nb3Si (UFO-MGen)
-0.438
5.13
5.13
5.13
90.00
90.00
90.00
Nb3Si (DFT)
-0.361
5.11
5.11
5.11
90.00
90.00
90.00
Pd4Se (UFO-MGen)
-0.121
5.33
5.33
5.69
90.00
90.00
90.00
Pd4Se (DFT)
-0.143
5.33
5.33
5.70
90.00
90.00
90.00
AlPS4 (UFO-MGen)
-0.603
5.73
5.73
10.55
90.01
89.99
90.00
AlPS4 (DFT)
-0.597
5.72
5.72
10.46
90.00
90.00
90.00
Based on Table S4.1, the DFT-calculated ∆Ef and optimized lattice parameters show excellent
agreement with those of the original structures generated by UFO-MGen, indicating that the gener-
ated crystals are not only thermodynamically stable, but also already close to their locally optimized
configurations, requiring only minimal structural relaxation. This agreement also demonstrates the
high structural accuracy and effectiveness of the UFO-MGen generation process.
23


S4.2
DFT validation of lattice-dynamic stability
To validate the second MSE criteria, namely the lattice-dynamical stability of the generated crystals,
DFT-based phonon calculations were carried out using the finite-difference method as implemented
in the Phonopy package [24, 25, 26]. The energy cutoff, energy convergence, and force convergence
criteria were set to the same values as those used in structural optimizations. The high-symmetry
points and corresponding reciprocal-space paths for the phonon dispersions were automatically
determined for each crystal structure using SeeK-path [27]. Atomic displacements in 2 × 2 × 2
supercells were used for the phonon calculations. The calculated phonon spectra and corresponding
density of state (DOS) are used to assess the lattice-dynamic stability of the generated crystals. The
structures with “clean” phonon spectrum or only minor imaginary models are considered lattice-
dynamically stable.
Here, we define minor imaginary modes as those for which the integrated
phonon DOS in the negative region is less than 0.05 phonon modes.
Figure S4.1 presents the phonon dispersion relations of six representative crystal structures
generated by UFO-MGen, selected from both the interpolation and extrapolation groups. The DFT-
calculated phonon dispersions show excellent agreement with the corresponding uMLIP predictions,
with no imaginary phonon frequencies observed for these structures.
These results confirm the
lattice-dynamic stability of the UFO-MGen-generated crystals and also validate the reliability of
the uMLIP for predicting the phonon properties of the generated materials.
S4.3
AIMD validation of thermal stability
For the final MSE criteria, we further ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations to vali-
date the thermal stability of all six representative crystals at 300 K. All AIMD simulations were
performed under the NVT ensemble for 10 ps, consistent with the uMLIP-based MD simulations.
Fig. S4.2 shows that the energy profiles remain stable throughout the AIMD simulations, with no
structural instabilities or phase transitions observed for any of the representative crystals. More-
over, MD simulations using three uMLIPs for the same 10 ps duration yield consistent results,
further supporting the thermal stability of these structures. Together, the AIMD and uMLIP-based
MD results demonstrate that the UFO-MGen-generated crystals remain structurally stable at finite
temperature.
24


Figure S4.1: DFT validation of phonon dispersion relations for the six representative crystal struc-
tures from UFO-MGen-predicted interpolation and extrapolation groups.
25


Figure S4.2: AIMD validation of thermal stability of six representative crystal structures from UFO-
MGen-predicted interpolation and extrapolation groups, respectively.
26


S4.4
DFT validation of additional generated crystals
In addition to the six representative generated structures shown in main-text Fig. 2(f), we performed
extensive validation on additional crystal structures for further validate the predictive capability
of UFO-MGen and associated uMLIP prediction accuracy.
For instance, Table S4.2 compares
the DFT-optimized lattice parameters of additional 21 crystal structures with the corresponding
UFO-MGen predictions. The perfect agreement between the DFT calculations and UFO-MGen
predictions further demonstrates the high structural accuracy of the generated crystal structures.
Furthermore, extensive DFT-based phonon calculations were performed to validate the lattice-
dynamic stability of the generated crystals.
Fig. S4.3 shows that both DFT-calculated phonon
spectra of 5 additional crystals exhibit no imaginary frequencies, consistent with the corresponding
uMLIP-calculated spectra.
These results confirm the lattice-dynamical stability of these gener-
ated crystals. In addition, the excellent agreement between the DFT and uMLIP results further
demonstrate the high accuracy of uMLIPs in predicting lattice-dynamical stability, supporting the
reliability and efficiency of the MSE framework proposed in this work.
Finally, we performed AIMD simulations to further validate the thermal stability of other crystal
structures. As shown in Fig. S4.4, the AIMD-simulated energy profiles remain stable thorough the 10
ps simulations, with no significant structural transitions or distortion observed. This indicates that
all examined crystals remain thermally stable at elevated temperatures, which is also consistent
with uMLIP-based MD simulations. Consequently, these extensive DFT and AIMD validations
demonstrate that the crystals generated by UFO-MGen can successfully pass the rigorous MSE
screening framework, highlighting the superior performance of UFO-MGen in generating crystal
structures.
S4.5
Comparison with Baseline Generative Models
Using the MSE criteria, we further evaluated the performance of baseline crystal generative models
and compared their results with UFO-MGen.
As described in the main text, UFO-MGen was
retrained on the MP20 dataset to ensure a fair comparison. Each generative model was then used
to generate 300 crystal structures, all of which were subjected to the same MSE screening framework
based on the three stability criteria. As shown in Table S4.3, the success rates for each MSE criterion
are summarized and compared across all models.
UFO-MGen consistently yields the largest number of stable candidates under each MSE crite-
rion, achieving the highest overall success rate of 59.3%. In contrast, the other generative models
exhibit substantially lower success rates, demonstrating the superior performance of UFO-MGen in
generating physically stable and valid crystal structures.
27


Table S4.2: DFT-calculated optimized lattice parameters (a, b, c, α, β, γ) of additional 21 crystals,
compared with the corresponding UFO-MGen predictions.
Formula
a (Å)
b (Å)
c (Å)
α (◦)
β (◦)
γ (◦)
CeSe2 (UFO-MGen)
4.88
4.88
13.79
90.00
90.00
90.00
CeSe2 (DFT)
4.09
7.08
8.42
90.00
110.53
90.00
TiAlV2 (UFO-MGen)
4.44
4.44
6.06
90.00
90.00
90.00
TiAlV2 (DFT)
4.39
4.40
6.09
90.00
90.00
90.00
GaAs (UFO-MGen)
4.07
4.07
5.76
89.99
90.00
90.00
GaAs (DFT)
4.08
4.07
5.79
90.00
90.00
90.00
Mo2C (UFO-MGen)
4.76
6.04
5.21
90.00
90.00
90.00
Mo2C (DFT)
4.71
6.08
5.24
90.00
90.00
90.00
Nb4CoSi (UFO-MGen)
6.22
6.22
5.03
90.00
90.00
90.00
Nb4CoSi (DFT)
6.19
6.19
5.02
90.00
90.00
90.00
KLiTe (UFO-MGen)
4.85
4.85
7.78
90.00
90.01
90.00
KLiTe (DFT)
4.84
4.84
7.78
90.00
90.00
90.00
Zr3O (UFO-MGen)
5.65
5.65
5.21
90.00
90.00
120.01
Zr3O (DFT)
5.66
5.66
5.21
90.00
90.00
120.00
LiScI3 (UFO-MGen)
7.48
7.48
6.74
90.00
90.00
120.00
LiScI3 (DFT)
7.40
7.40
6.71
90.00
90.00
120.00
NiAsSe (UFO-MGen)
7.41
5.86
4.81
90.00
90.00
90.00
NiAsSe (DFT)
7.43
5.85
4.84
90.00
90.00
90.00
V6SiOs (UFO-MGen)
4.75
4.75
4.75
90.00
90.00
90.00
V6SiOs (DFT)
4.73
4.73
4.73
90.00
90.00
90.00
CrN2 (UFO-MGen)
4.75
4.75
4.75
90.00
90.00
90.00
CrN2 (DFT)
4.69
4.69
4.69
90.00
90.00
90.00
BC3 (UFO-MGen)
5.01
4.53
2.57
90.01
104.87
116.88
BC3 (DFT)
5.04
4.55
2.61
89.99
105.02
116.78
MnV2C3 (UFO-MGen)
4.82
4.82
5.29
90.00
90.00
120.00
MnV2C3 (DFT)
4.84
4.84
5.21
90.00
90.00
120.00
MnMo2C3 (UFO-MGen)
4.96
4.96
5.57
90.00
90.00
120.00
MnMo2C3 (DFT)
4.94
4.94
5.53
90.00
90.00
119.99
VCo2C3 (UFO-MGen)
4.66
4.66
5.25
90.00
90.00
119.99
VCo2C3 (DFT)
4.65
4.65
5.28
90.00
90.00
120.00
V3C3N (UFO-MGen)
8.90
2.90
9.92
90.00
90.00
90.00
V3C3N (DFT)
8.84
2.91
9.90
90.00
90.00
90.00
V2SiC2 (UFO-MGen)
4.06
4.06
6.81
90.00
90.00
90.00
V2SiC2 (DFT)
4.04
4.04
6.89
90.00
90.00
90.00
Ti2CrC2N (UFO-MGen)
6.00
4.21
9.03
90.00
90.00
90.00
Ti2CrC2N (DFT)
6.03
4.19
9.05
90.00
90.00
90.00
VCrC2 (UFO-MGen)
2.91
7.04
7.69
69.43
90.34
88.64
VCrC2 (DFT)
2.91
7.04
7.66
68.39
90.70
88.67
TiNiC2 (UFO-MGen)
3.29
3.29
8.11
90.00
90.00
90.00
TiNiC2 (DFT)
3.32
3.32
8.18
90.00
90.00
90.00
Cr4C3 (UFO-MGen)
7.84
2.79
11.77
90.00
90.00
90.00
Cr4C3 (DFT)
7.87
2.81
11.64
90.00
90.00
90.00
28


Table S4.3: Baseline comparison under the UFO-MGen-MP20 downstream screening protocol.
Screening-stage results are reported within the shortlisted candidates, while the final column reports stable
candidates normalized per 10,000 generated structures.
Model
Shortlist
Thermodynamic
Lattice-dynamic
Thermal
overall MSE
CDVAE
300
291 (97.0%)
148 (49.3%)
125 (84.5%)
41.7%
DiffCSP
300
294 (98.0%)
137 (45.7%)
114 (83.2%)
38.0%
DiffCSP++
300
294 (98.0%)
123 (41.0%)
116 (94.3%)
38.7%
MatterGen
300
294 (98.0%)
144 (48.0%)
118 (81.9%)
39.3%
UFO-MGen
300
300 (100%)
196 (65.3%)
178 (90.9%)
59.3%
Figure S4.3: DFT validation of the phonon dispersion relations for an additional 5 crystal struc-
tures generated by UFO-MGen model, compared with the corresponding uMLIP-calculated phonon
spectra.
Figure S4.4: AIMD validation of the thermal stability for an additional 4 crystal structures generated
by UFO-MGen model, compared with the corresponding uMLIP-calculated energy profiles
29


S5
Evaluation Metrics
S5.1
Public metrics
In addition to validating the MSE criteria discussed in Section S4, we conducted another round
of comprehensive evaluation of UFO-MGen on the ab initio crystal generation using established
public metrics, including structural validity, compositional validity, coverage of the reference set,
distributional agreement, stability–uniqueness–novelty (SUN), and geometric error [6, 8, 28]. Unless
stated otherwise, these metrics are computed with the public evaluator adopted by the corresponding
benchmark.
For baseline methods, we report values from the original papers or from released evaluation
scripts when a matched re-evaluation is not available. Metrics that are not reported, or not computed
under the same protocol, are marked as “/”. Higher values indicate better performance for validity,
coverage, and SUN, whereas low values are preferred for distribution distances and root mean square
derivation (RMSD). The evaluation using these public metrics is conducted separately from the MSE
validation and screening based on uMLIPs and DFT calculations.
S5.1.1
Validity, coverage and distribution metrics
We evaluate generated crystals using validity, coverage, and distributional alignment metrics follow-
ing the public benchmark protocols [6, 8]. All metric definitions and thresholds are kept consistent
with the public evaluator, and we do not introduce additional validity or matching criteria in this
work.
Validity metrics. Structural validity is denoted as Val-Struct, measures the fraction of gen-
erated crystals that pass basic structural checks, including valid lattice parameters, positive cell
volume, valid periodic coordinates, and the absence of severe atomic overlap. Compositional va-
lidity, denoted as Val-Comp, measures the fraction of generated crystals with chemically valid
compositions under the benchmark rules, such as element validity, charge or valence sanity checks,
and allowed stoichiometry.
Coverage metrics. Coverage metrics evaluate whether the generated structures can recover
the reference crystal distribution under the benchmark structure matcher and a distance threshold.
We report both COV-R and COV-P. COV-R measures the fraction of reference structures covered by
the generated set, while COV-P measures the fraction of generated structures that can be matched
to the reference set.
Distributional alignment metrics. We further compare generated and reference crystals
using distributional distances computed over scalar or categorical properties of the full generated
set, rather than over individual matched structures. Lower values indicate better agreement with the
reference distribution. Specifically, we report the density distance dρ, the energy-related distance
dE, the elemental distance delem, and the space-group distance dsg.
The space-group distance
is especially relevant for UFO-MGen, since the model explicitly generates the symmetry scaffold
before sampling continuous Wyckoff parameters.
30


S5.1.2
Stability, uniqueness and novelty (SUN) metric
We report the SUN rate [28] as the fraction of generated structures that are stable, unique and
novel at the same time. This metric is more restrictive than stability alone, since a structure must
also be non-duplicated within the generated set and absent from the reference database.
Stability: A generated structure is counted as stable if it satisfies the energetic-stability criterion
used in the corresponding evaluation protocol. Because different crystal generative models may
use different relaxation pipelines, energy models, and stability thresholds, we report SUN under
the protocol aligned with MatterGen [28] for direct comparison. Specifically, energetic stability is
evaluated after structural relaxation and is defined by the near-hull criterion:
∆Ehull ≤0.1 eV/atom,
(40)
where ∆Ehull is the energy above the convex hull. For baseline models, the reported SUN are taken
from the published results rather than recomputed in our workflow.
This choice avoids mixing
different stability-evaluation pipelines and ensures that the comparison follows the same reported
benchmark convention.
Uniqueness: A generated structure is counted as unique if it does not match any earlier
structure in the same generated set. Matching is performed with the structure matcher used by
the public evaluator. The standard pymatgen StructureMatcher [29] is used, we use the default
tolerance setting.
Novelty: A generated structure is counted as novel if it does not match any structure in
the training set or reference database under the same structure matcher. In this work, novelty is
evaluated after reducing the structure to the same representation used by the benchmark matcher.
The three conditions are applied jointly. Thus, a structure with low energy is not counted as
SUN if it is a duplicate of another generated structure or if it matches a known training/reference
structure. Because SUN depends on the energy estimator, relaxation settings, structure matcher
and novelty database, we use it as a summary metric but report the underlying stable, unique and
novel rates whenever possible.
S5.1.3
RMSD and relaxed RMSD
Root mean square deviation (RMSD) measures the geometric difference between a generated crystal
structure and a reference state by comparing their local atomic coordination. This metric can be
defined as:
RMSD =
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
i=1
ri −ˆrπ(i)
2,
(41)
where ri is the Cartesian coordinate of atom i in the reference structure, ˆrπ(i) is the matched atom
in the generated structure, and π is the atom mapping from the structure matcher. Due to ordered
and periodic nature of crystal structures, RMSD must account for periodic boundary conditions
(PBCs), local atom ordering, species matching, and possible cell choices. We therefore rely on the
benchmark matcher rather than direct coordinate subtraction.
31


S5.1.4
Comparison with MP-20 baseline
Table S5.1 summarizes the public benchmark metrics of the baseline models and UFO-MGen for
the ab initio crystal generations using MP20 database. All public metrics are evaluated based on
10,000 crystal structures generated by each model. It clearly shows that the UFO-MGen exhibits
the best performance in both Validity and SUN rate among the 12 mainstream generative models.
Table S5.1: Comparison of crystal generation performance on MP-20 under public evaluation metrics.
Values marked with † are literature-reported rows. Values marked with ‡ are UFO-MGen rows from the
current evaluation logs. A slash indicates that the metric is not yet available under the same protocol.
Model
Val-Struct. Val-Comp. COV-R COV-P
dρ ↓
dE ↓
delem ↓
dsg ↓
SUN
RMSD
CDVAE [6]†
100.0
86.70
99.15
99.49
0.6875 0.2778
1.432
0.69
4.26 [30]
/
DiffCSP [8]†
100.0
83.25
99.71
99.76
0.3502 0.1247 0.3398
/
8.92 [30]
/
DiffCSP++ [31]†
99.94
85.12
99.73
99.59
0.2351 0.0574 0.3749
/
8.62 [30]
/
FlowMM [3]†
96.85
83.19
99.49
99.58
0.239
0.083
/
/
6.49 [30]
/
SymmCD [30]†
94.32
85.85
99.64
98.87
0.0901 0.1166 0.3990 0.0899 6.89 [30]
/
MatterGen [28]†
100.0
82.60
/
/
0.2059
/
0.2416 0.4331
22.0
0.11
SGEquiDiff [32]†
99.81
84.06
/
/
0.6247
/
0.1988 0.1769
12.47
/
WyFormer [33]†
99.56
80.44
98.67
96.72
0.74
0.053
0.097
0.223
6.9
/
OMatG [34]†
99.64
87.02
99.39
99.86
0.0834
/
0.0784
/
18.58
0.294
CrystalFlow [35]†
99.55
81.96
98.21
99.84
0.169
0.259
/
/
3.7
/
FlowLLM [36]†
99.94
90.84
96.95
99.82
1.14
/
0.15
/
4.92
0.023
UFO-MGen (MP20) ‡
100.0
91.30
96.58
99.45
0.2049 0.3214 0.4754
0.099
31.3
0.29
S5.2
Interpolation and extrapolation metrics
Space groups are one of most fundamental descriptors of crystal structures, with a total of 230
distinct space groups. As discussed in main-text Section 2.4, examining whether generated crystals
cover the space groups represented in the training data provides a measure of their ability to generate
structures within the domain knowledge. On the other hand, the ability to generate unprecedented
crystal structures belonging to space groups absent from the training dataset represent an important
measure of the models’ capability of extrapolation. As such, we introduce two metrics: interpolation
rate and extrapolation rate, to evaluate the generative capability of models.
To evaluate these two capabilities, we used each generative model to generate 10,000 crystals and
then calculate interpolation and extrapolation rates. Since existing generative models were trained
on the MP20 database, we also retrained UFO-MGen using MP20 database and generated 10,000
crystals under the same setting for a fair comparison. During retaining, we only adopted Stages II
and III for crystal generation, as Stage I fixes the crystal scaffold and thus limits the exploration
of space groups beyound those represented in the training dataset. Because the MP20 database
covers 177 space groups, leaving 53 space groups absent from the training set, the interpolation and
extrapolation rates can be easily determined by calculating the percentage of generated crystals
belonging to space groups within and beyound the training set, respectively.
Table S5.2 summarizes the interpolation and extrapolation rates of leading generative models
and our UFO-MGen. Once again, UFO-MGen exhibits the highest coverage for both interpolation
and extrapolation among all evaluated generative models. These results further demonstrate the
32


strong capability of UFO-MGen to generate chemically and structurally diverse crystal structures
within and beyond the space groups represented in the training domain.
Table S5.2: Model performance comparison on coverage and extrapolation rate.
Model
Interpolation rate (%)
Extrapolation rate (%)
DiffCSP++
81.4
3.8
DiffCSP
57.6
3.8
CDVAE
31.6
0.0
MatterGen
65.5
0.0
UFO-MGen
85.5
45.3
33


S6
Ablation Studies of UFO-MGen Performance
Ablation tests are commonly adopted to evaluate how individual components, layers, or features
contribute to the overall performance of a machine-learning model. In main-text Fig. 4, we perform
a series of ablation studies on revealing the key mechanisms underlying UFO-MGen, where different
types of database and diffusion-based models are adopted to systematically compare their crystal
generation performance with UFO-MGen. In addition, we conduct another round of ablation study
to understand which components of UFO-MGen actually dominate its overall performance. Rather
than treating all ablation experiments as equally important, we categorize them according to the
specific model components and capabilities they are designed to evaluate. Since main performance
of UFO-MGen primarily comes from three components: Stage I, Stage II, and Stage III, our ablation
tests primarily focus on quantifying the contribution of each state to the overall model performance.
S6.1
Ablation test for Stage I: HTS
Stage I constrains the crystal topology scaffold prior to generation, thereby guiding the model
toward more stable and physically plausible structures. However, because Stage I is trained on
datasets containing only 35 trainable space groups, it also restricts the generated crystals to these
space groups and limits the model’s ability to explore beyond the training domain. Table S6.1
summarizes the results obtained after removing Stage I. Although the overall stability decreases,
the model gains substantial extrapolation capability, enabling it to explore beyond the training
domain and generate crystals across 52 previously unseen space groups that successfully pass the
MSE screening framework.
S6.2
Ablation test for Stage II: COM
Stage II enables diverse chemical occupancies and elemental compositions, allowing UFO-MGen to
explore novel compositional spaces within physically reasonable crystal scaffolds. When Stage II is
removed, the generated distribution shifts toward more frequently occurring and inherently stable
elemental assignments, making the generation process more deterministic and primarily focused on
generating continuous structural features within familiar scaffolds. Consequently, in terms of the
physical stability of generated crystals, the ablated model exhibits a higher success rate than UFO-
MGen-Full. However, further evaluation using the SUN metric (Table S6.1) reveals that, although
most generated crystals are physically valid and stable, the ablated model tends to reproduce known
structures rather than discover unique ones. These results demonstrate that Stage II plays a critical
role in expanding the chemical diversity and novelty of UFO-MGen-generated crystals.
S6.3
Ablation test for Stage III: SWG
Stage III determines whether a discrete scaffold design can be realized as a geometrically valid
three-dimensional crystal structure. Although the thermodynamic and lattice-dynamic stabilities
of crystals generated without Stage III show only minor differences after structural relaxation,
their reduced AIMD stability indicates that removing Stage III leads to less physically reasonable
34


lattice parameters and atomic coordinates, resulting in atomic drift and eventual scaffold collapse.
Compared with UFO-MGen-Full, UFO-MGen without Stage III generates one stable structure that
is classified as belonging to an unexplored space group (Table S6.1). However, this structure does not
represent true extrapolation, as it is assigned to a different space group only after minor structural
changes during relaxation. Therefore, the importance of Stage III is further reflected in its ability
to generate geometrically valid structures that preserve their crystallographic symmetry during
structural relaxation.
In conclusion, our ablation studies demonstrate that each component of UFO-MGen plays a
critical role in determining the overall model performance.
These results further highlight the
importance of the hierarchical architecture of UFO-MGen and demonstrate the effectiveness of its
three-stage design.
Table S6.1: Ablation study of each stage in UFO-MGen. The symbol “*” denotes an extrapolated space
group whose symmetry changes during structural optimization.
Model Variant
Thermodynamic and lattice stability (%)
Thermal stability (%)
MSE (%)
SUN (%)
Extrapolated SG
UFO-MGen-Full
29.5
93.3
27.5
20.3
0
No Stage I
28.7
90.7
26.0
19.8
52
No Stage II
32.0
95.8
30.7
6.5
0
No Stage III
29.2
89.4
26.1
18.8
1*
35


S7
Inverse Materials Design
S7.1
Fine-tuning architecture
Property-constrained crystal generation is a critical step toward inverse materials design. To enable
this capability, we introduce property-guided tasks into UFO-MGen and fine-tune all three stages
toward targeted material properties. Figure S7.1 illustrates the three-stage conditional decomposi-
tion of UFO-MGen, in which property guidance is independently incorporated into the selection of
crystal topology scaffolds, elemental occupancy, and continuous geometric degrees of freedom.
Specifically, property-based fine-tuning is applied throughout all three generation stages by
assigning larger training weights to structures with stronger target properties. In Stage I, the model
learns from predictor high score and the extreme scaffold distributions of the training set labels,
guiding the UFO-MGen to a extreme performance generative space. In Stage II, property-weighted
training guides element selection and orbit occupancy, while COM-ALLOWED further constrains the
sampled chemical space to elements related to extreme properties. In Stage III, the flow-matching
objective is weighted by the same property scores, encouraging the generation of crystal geometries
that better support the target performance.
S7.2
Mechanical property datasets
In this work, we select mechanical properties as the target material properties for fine-tuning UFO-
MGen, and we refer this specialized model as UFO-Mech. The mechanical property predictor is
trained on elastic data collected from multiple sources. The main dataset is obtained from JARVIS-
DFT [37], where 8,753 cleaned samples are used for elastic-label training. Materials Project [13]
elasticity adds 4,933 samples, and the de Jong Scientific Data 2015 dataset [38] provides 1,181
samples for external validation. After removing duplicates across databases, the final labeled dataset
contains 13,686 crystals, which are split into 10,948 training samples, 1,369 validation, and 1,369
test samples. The prediction targets include bulk modulus, shear modulus, Young’s modulus, and
Poisson’s ratios. During training, samples exhibiting extreme mechanical properties are assigned
higher weights to bias the model toward mechanically robust materials. The mechanical-extreme
score, Smech, is defined as jointly considering high bulk modulus, shear modulus, and high Young’s
Figure S7.1: Workflow of fine-tuning architecture in UFO-MGen for predicting materials properties
of generated crystal structures with target mechanical properties .
36


modulus:
Smech = z(log(Bulk)) + z(log(Shear)) + z(log(Young’s)) −Punstable
(42)
where z is standard normalization, log(Bulk), log(Shear), and log(Young’s) are the logarithmically
transformed bulk modulus, shear modulus, and Young’s modulus, respectively, and Punstable is an
additional penalty for structural instability.
S7.3
DFT validation of UFO-Mech
To fully evaluate the performance of UFO-Mech, we first use the this fine-tuned model to generate
a series of new crystal structures and predict their associated mechanical properties. Next, DFT
calculations are performed to independently validate both the generated crystal structures and
their predicted mechanical properties.
For each fully optimized structure, the elastic constants
are calculated using the finite-difference method, in which small lattice distortions are applied and
the resulting stress response is used to determine the elastic stiffness tensor, Cij, within the linear
elastic regime [38]. The calculated elastic constants are expressed as a 6×6 stiffness matrix in Voigt
notation. The corresponding elastic compliance tensor, S, is obtained by inversion of the stiffness
tensor:
Sij = C−1
ij
(43)
The bulk modulus and shear modulus are determined using the Voigt–Reuss–Hill (VRH) ap-
proximation [39]. The Voigt estimates [40] are calculated from the elastic stiffness constants as:
BV = C11 + C22 + C33 + 2(C12 + C13 + C23)
9
,
(44)
GV = C11 + C22 + C33 −(C12 + C13 + C23) + 3(C44 + C55 + C66)
15
,
(45)
where BV and GV are the Voigt bulk and shear moduli, respectively. The corresponding Reuss
estimates [41] are calculated from the elastic compliance constants as:
BR =
1
S11 + S22 + S33 + 2(S12 + S13 + S23),
(46)
GR =
15
4(S11 + S22 + S33) −4(S12 + S13 + S23) + 3(S44 + S55 + S66),
(47)
where BR and GR are the Reuss bulk and shear moduli, respectively. The final bulk and shear moduli
are obtained using the Hill approximation by taking the arithmetic average of the corresponding
Voigt and Reuss estimates:
Bulk modulus = BV + BR
2
,
(48)
Shear modulus = GV + GR
2
.
(49)
Finally, Young’s modulus is calculated from the Hill-averaged bulk and shear moduli according
37


Figure S7.2: DFT validation of mechanical properties predicted by UFO-Mech.
to the following equation:
Young’s modulus = 9 × Bulk modulus × Shear modulus
3 × Bulk modulus + Shear modulus.
(50)
The resulting DFT-derived bulk, shear, and Young’s moduli are used to evaluate the mechanical-
property predictions of UFO-Mech. Figure S7.2 presents parity plots comparing the three mechan-
ical properties predicted by UFO-Mech with those calculated by DFT for 33 generated crystal
structures. The strong linear correlations demonstrate the high accuracy of UFO-Mech in predict-
ing these mechanical properties. Moreover, the structural diversity of the generated candidates
indicates that UFO-Mech does not rely on a single preferred structural motif to achieve property
optimization. Instead, it generates diverse stable crystal structures that exhibit exceptional me-
chanical properties.
S7.4
Scaffold effect on mechanical properties
As discussed in the main-text Section 2.7, scaffold features play a critical role in governing me-
chanical properties of materials. For instance, main-text Fig. 5(c) shows that imposing a specific
scaffold feature on 50 material systems can significantly enhance their mechanical properties. To
further validate this effect, we select additional three common scaffold features among the crystal
structures located in the red cluster in Fig. 5(b), including c = (P −1, 2i, 2i), (C2/c, 4e ∗4, 4f ∗4),
and (P4/mbm, 2a, 4g, 4h, 8i). Each scaffold is then imposed on 50 new crystal structures, and their
mechanical properties are subsequently calculated and compared with those of the corresponding
original structures. Figure S7.3 shows that all three scaffold can significantly improve the mechanical
properties of the tested crystals, with improvements of 31.08%, 37.33%, and 32.08%, respectively.
These additional tests further demonstrate the critical roles of crystal scaffolds in governing the
mechanical properties of materials. Since our UFO-MGen can be easily fine-tuned to target other
materials properties, we anticipate that scaffold features may also play an important role in gov-
erning a broad range of materials properties.
38


Figure S7.3: Additional tests of three specific scaffold features identified within the red clusters in
main-text Fig. 5(b) to affect the three key mechanical properties of materials.
39


References
[1] Theo Hahn, editor. International Tables for Crystallography, Volume A: Space-Group Symme-
try. Springer, Dordrecht, 5th edition, 2005.
[2] Ryan P. Adams and Peter Orbanz. Representing and learning functions invariant under crys-
tallographic groups. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05261, 2023.
[3] Benjamin
Kurt
Miller,
Ricky
T.
Q.
Chen,
Anuroop
Sriram,
and
Brandon
M.
Wood.
FlowMM: Generating materials with Riemannian flow matching.
Preprint at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.04713, 2024.
[4] Keith J. McGill, Mojgan Asadi, Maria Toneva Karakasheva, Lawrence C. Andrews, and Her-
bert J. Bernstein. The geometry of niggli reduction iii: SAUC – search of alternate unit cells.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1307.1811, 2013.
[5] Hans Wondratschek and Ulrich Mueller, editors.
International Tables for Crystallography,
Volume A1: Symmetry Relations Between Space Groups. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, 2
edition, 2010.
[6] Tian Xie, Xiang Fu, Octavian-Eugen Ganea, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Crystal
diffusion variational autoencoder for periodic material generation. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2022.
[7] Youzhi Luo, Chengkai Liu, and Shuiwang Ji. Towards symmetry-aware generation of periodic
materials. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.02707, 2023.
[8] Rui
Jiao,
Wenbing
Huang,
Peijia
Lin,
Jiaqi
Han,
Pin
Chen,
Yutong
Lu,
and
Yang Liu.
Crystal structure prediction by joint equivariant diffusion.
Preprint at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.04475, 2023.
[9] Mois I. Aroyo, J. Manuel Perez-Mato, Cesar Capillas, Eli Kroumova, Svetoslav Ivantchev,
Gotzon Madariaga, Asen Kirov, and Hans Wondratschek. Bilbao crystallographic server: I.
databases and crystallographic computing programs. Zeitschrift für Kristallographie - Crys-
talline Materials, 221(1):15–27, 2006.
[10] Atsushi Togo, Kohei Shinohara, and Isao Tanaka. Spglib: a software library for crystal sym-
metry search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.01590, 2018.
[11] Zhendong Cao, Xiaoshan Luo, Jian Lv, and Lei Wang. Space group informed transformer for
crystalline materials generation. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.15734, 2024.
[12] Filip Ekström Kelvinius et al. Wyckoffdiff – a generative diffusion model for crystal symmetry.
In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 267, pages
15130–15147, 2025.
[13] Anubhav Jain et al. Commentary: The materials project: A materials genome approach to
accelerating materials innovation. APL Mater., 1:011002, 2013.
40


[14] Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling.
Auto-encoding variational bayes.
In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2014.
[15] Emile Mathieu and Maximilian Nickel. Riemannian continuous normalizing flows. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pages 2503–2515, 2020.
[16] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel.
Denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pages 6840–6851, 2020.
[17] Yaron Lipman, Ricky T. Q. Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matt Le. Flow
matching for generative modeling. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2023.
[18] Dale Husemoller. Fibre Bundles, volume 20 of Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer, New
York, 3 edition, 1994.
[19] Alexander Tong et al. Improving and generalizing flow-based generative models with minibatch
optimal transport. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res., 2023.
[20] Georg Kresse and Jürgen Furthmüller.
Efficiency of ab-initio total energy calculations for
metals and semiconductors using a plane-wave basis set. Comput. Mater. Sci., 6(1):15–50,
1996.
[21] Georg Kresse and Jürgen Hafner. Ab initio molecular dynamics for liquid metals. Phys. Rev.
B, 47(1):558, 1993.
[22] Peter E. Blöchl. Projector augmented-wave method. Phys. Rev. B, 50:17953–17979, 1994.
[23] Stefan Grimme. Semiempirical gga-type density functional constructed with a long-range dis-
persion correction. J. Comput. Chem., 27:1787–1799, 2006.
[24] Atsushi Togo, Laurent Chaput, Terumasa Tadano, and Isao Tanaka. Implementation strategies
in phonopy and phono3py. J. Phys. Condens. Matter, 35:353001, 2023.
[25] Atsushi Togo and Isao Tanaka. First principles phonon calculations in materials science. Scr.
Mater., 108:1–5, 2015.
[26] Atsushi Togo. First-principles phonon calculations with phonopy and phono3py. J. Phys. Soc.
Jpn., 92:012001, 2023.
[27] Yoyo Hinuma, Giovanni Pizzi, Yu Kumagai, Fumiyasu Oba, and Isao Tanaka. Band structure
diagram paths based on crystallography. Comput. Mater. Sci., 128:140–184, 2017.
[28] Claudio Zeni et al. A generative model for inorganic materials design. Nature, 639:624–632,
2025.
[29] Shyue Ping Ong et al. Python materials genomics (pymatgen): A robust, open-source python
library for materials analysis. Comput. Mater. Sci., 68:314–319, 2013.
41


[30] Daniel Levy, Siba Smarak Panigrahi, Sékou-Oumar Kaba, Qiang Zhu, Kin Long Kelvin Lee,
Mikhail Galkin, Santiago Miret, and Siamak Ravanbakhsh. Symmcd: Symmetry-preserving
crystal generation with diffusion models. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.03638, 2025.
[31] Rui Jiao, Wenbing Huang, Yu Liu, Deli Zhao, and Yang Liu. Space group constrained crystal
generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
[32] Rees Chang et al. Space group equivariant crystal diffusion. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 38, 2025.
[33] Nikita Kazeev et al. Wyckoff transformer: Generation of symmetric crystals. In Proceedings
of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 267, pages 29495–29526,
2025.
[34] Philipp Höllmer and Stefano Martiniani. Open materials generation with inference-time rein-
forcement learning. In Forty-third International Conference on Machine Learning, 2026.
[35] Xiaoshan Luo et al. Crystalflow: a flow-based generative model for crystalline materials. Nat.
Commun., 16:9267, 2025.
[36] Anuroop Sriram, Benjamin Kurt Miller, Ricky T. Q. Chen, and Brandon M. Wood. Flowllm:
Flow matching for material generation with large language models as base distributions. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 37, pages 46025–46046, 2024.
[37] Kamal Choudhary et al. The joint automated repository for various integrated simulations
(jarvis) for data-driven materials design. npj Comput. Mater., 6:173, 2020.
[38] Maarten de Jong et al. Charting the complete elastic properties of inorganic crystalline com-
pounds. Sci. Data, 2:150009, 2015.
[39] Richard Hill. The elastic behaviour of a crystalline aggregate. Proc. Phys. Soc. A, 65:349–354,
1952.
[40] W. Voigt. Lehrbuch der Kristallphysik. B. G. Teubner, Leipzig and Berlin, 1928.
[41] András Reuß. Berechnung der fließgrenze von mischkristallen auf grund der plastizitätsbedin-
gung für einkristalle. Z. Angew. Math. Mech., 9:49–58, 1929.
42
