Neural Network Backflow with Low-Rank Multi-Determinant Updates
Tianshu Huang,1, 2, ∗Xiaowei Ou,1, 3, † and Vidvuds Ozoli¸nˇs1, 2, ‡
1Energy Sciences Institute, Yale University, West Haven, Connecticut 06516, USA
2Department of Applied Physics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA
3Department of Physics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA
(Dated: September 23, 2026)
Simulating strongly correlated fermions remains a long-standing challenge due to the exponential
complexity of the Hilbert space and the intricate sign structure of many-body wavefunctions. We in-
troduce a variational framework centered on a neural network backflow transformation that combines
deep learning with variational Monte Carlo. The proposed ansatz employs a multi-determinant ex-
pansion with low-rank shifts to capture non-local correlations and complex sign structures. Applied
to the two-dimensional Hubbard model at both half-filling and 1/8 doping, the method achieves en-
ergies within 0.45% of auxiliary-field quantum Monte Carlo at half-filling and captures intertwined
charge- and spin-density stripe patterns at 1/8 doping. These results demonstrate the potential
of this framework as a scalable and interpretable approach to variational simulations of strongly
correlated fermionic systems.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Solving many-body fermionic systems remains one of
the most formidable challenges in computational physics,
primarily due to the exponential growth of the Hilbert
space and the emergence of non-trivial wavefunction sign
structures. These complexities often render traditional
numerical methods either computationally prohibitive or
systematically biased.
To address this, many numeri-
cal methods are under active development, including the
density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) [1, 2],
projected entangled pair states (PEPS) [3–5], and various
quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) [6–10] techniques. Despite
their successes, these methods face inherent limitations:
tensor networks like DMRG and PEPS are constrained
by high entanglement in two dimensions, while quantum
Monte Carlo remains hampered by the fermionic sign
problem, particularly in the computationally challenging
doped regime.
In recent years, neural quantum states (NQS) [11]
have emerged as a transformative paradigm for address-
ing these gaps. By utilizing neural networks as flexible
variational wavefunction ansatzes, NQS methods have
demonstrated a remarkable ability to capture intricate
many-body correlations [12–18]. For fermionic systems,
the application of NQS typically adapts the Slater de-
terminant formalism to satisfy the requisite antisymme-
try.
To incorporate higher-order correlations, Jastrow
factors, backflow transformations, and their variants are
introduced [19–28]. In this framework, the neural net-
work performs a backflow transformation that maps bare
particle coordinates into a set of collective, quasiparti-
cle features. The neural network backflow transforma-
tion has consistently provided some of the most accurate
∗tianshu.huang@yale.edu
† xiaowei.ou@yale.edu
‡ vidvuds.ozolins@yale.edu
variational energies to date, as it is uniquely capable of
deforming the nodal surfaces of the wavefunction to con-
verge toward the true physical ground state.
However, the expressive power of deep neural network
backflow transformations comes at a high cost: mod-
els with a large number of parameters are computation-
ally expensive to store and involve intensive evaluation
times, often limiting their scalability for larger systems.
One established path to enhancing performance without
simply scaling the network depth is the adoption of a
multi-determinant wavefunction format. By representing
the state as a linear combination of several Slater deter-
minants, the model can capture different sectors of the
Hilbert space more effectively. When calculating neural
network backflow coefficients, one could directly generate
unique backflow matrices for each determinant by mod-
ifying the number of network outputs [28]. Meanwhile,
the parameter count blows up linearly with the number
of determinants, quickly leading to memory bottlenecks.
Alternatively, one can utilize the physical symmetries of
the lattice to generate a multi-determinant state by eval-
uating a single backflow network on various symmetry-
transformed versions of the electron configuration [29–
34]. While this approach is extremely parameter-efficient
for reusing the same weights for all determinants while
enforcing physical symmetries, it introduces additional
computational cost for calculating the character of irre-
ducible representations of the symmetry operations and
the network evaluation of all symmetry-equivalent con-
figurations.
We present matrix shifts as an alternative approach
for generating multi-determinant expansions. To main-
tain computational efficiency, these determinant-specific
shifts are implemented in a low-rank factorized form.
By decomposing the updates into low-rank products
rather than full-rank matrices, this architecture enables
a multi-determinant ansatz while avoiding the over-
parameterization and prohibitive scaling typically asso-
ciated with traditional methods. This property ensures
that both the parameter count and the cost of determi-
arXiv:2609.26544v1  [cond-mat.str-el]  22 Sep 2026


2
nant updates remain numerically tractable.
II.
MODEL AND METHOD
A.
The 2D Hubbard Hamiltonian
We focus on the standard Hubbard Hamiltonian,
which considers only nearest-neighbor hopping and on-
site Coulomb interactions. The Hamiltonian is expressed
as
ˆH = −t
X
σ=↑,↓
Nsite
X
<i,j>
(ˆc†
iσˆcjσ + ˆc†
jσˆciσ) + U
Nsite
X
j
ˆnj↑ˆnj↓, (1)
where Nsite is the total number of lattice sites.
The
operators ˆc†
iσ and ˆciσ denote the creation and annihi-
lation of an electron with spin σ at site i, respectively.
The notation ⟨i, j⟩indicates that hopping is restricted to
nearest-neighbor pairs with an associated hopping am-
plitude t. The occupation number operator is given by
ˆnjσ = ˆc†
jσˆcjσ, and U represents the energy penalty for
two electrons of opposite spin occupying the same site.
The first term in Eq. (1) represents the kinetic energy
of the system, while the second term accounts for the
on-site Coulomb repulsion.
B.
Variational Monte Carlo and Optimization
To determine the ground state of the Hubbard Hamil-
tonian, we optimize the variational parameters θ of the
neural backflow ansatz using the Variational Monte Carlo
(VMC) method. The primary objective is to minimize
the energy expectation value, which serves as the loss
function:
E(θ) = ⟨Ψθ| ˆH|Ψθ⟩
⟨Ψθ|Ψθ⟩
= Ex∼|Ψθ(x)|2[EL(x)]
(2)
where EL(x) = P
x′ Hx,x′ Ψθ(x′)
Ψθ(x) is the local energy. We
estimate this quantity and its gradients by sampling the
configuration space according to the probability distribu-
tion |Ψθ(x)|2.
To update the parameters θ, we utilize the Sub-
sampled Projected-Increment Natural Gradient Descent
(SPRING) method [35]. While the standard stochastic
reconfiguration (SR) method [36] identifies an update by
minimizing the norm of the difference between the vari-
ational parameter shifts and the local energy gradient,
SPRING also prioritizes stability by minimizing the de-
viation from the previous parameter update.
C.
Neural network ansatz
We solve the ground-state properties of the two-
dimensional Hubbard model using a variational Monte
Carlo (VMC) framework enhanced by a deep neural net-
work wavefunction ansatz. The central challenge in sim-
ulating the doped Hubbard regime lies in the intricate
nodal structure of the fermionic wavefunction, which tra-
ditional trial states often fail to capture with sufficient
flexibility. To address this, we introduce a hierarchical
architecture that combines a deep neural network back-
flow transformation with a low-rank factorized multi-
determinant expansion. Fig. 1 presents our neural net-
work architecture design. In the following subsections,
we detail the components of this architecture.
1.
Input embedding
The network architecture begins with an input embed-
ding block that converts the input configuration x, a 2D
grid representing site occupations and spin states, into
a format the model can ingest. Inspired by the vision
transformer architecture [37], we first split the lattice
grid into Npatch fixed-size patches of shape p × p, each
capturing a subset of the spatial occupation and spin in-
formation. Following the partitioning, each patch’s spa-
tial information is transformed into a single row vector,
where the electron occupations are represented in a one-
hot encoding format, and these rows are stacked to form
a structured token matrix. The token matrix then passes
through a linear layer that performs a trainable projec-
tion. This layer maps the discrete, sparse information
of the electron occupations into a high-dimensional la-
tent space. The resulting output is an embedded vector
xembedded ∈RNpatch×d, where d is the embedding dimen-
sion.
2.
Static kernel encoder
The embedded variable is fed into an encoder featuring
a residual-based structure designed for efficient feature
extraction.
Each of the Nl consecutive layers consists
of two primary sub-blocks, both of which utilize layer
normalization to ensure training stability. The first sub-
block processes the input through a feed-forward net-
work, followed by a projection from a static kernel α.
As an input-independent learnable parameter matrix, α
enables the model to enforce specific spatial correlations
directly within the mapping, a process analogous to a fac-
tored attention mechanism without translation-invariant
modulation [18].
A secondary feed-forward sub-block
provides further feature refinement. Both stages incor-
porate residual connections (⊕), which facilitate efficient
gradient flow and allow the network to learn incremental
updates to the data representation. The encoder finally
outputs the processed state xencoded ∈RNsite×d.


3
FIG. 1: Schematic of the neural network architecture. (a) The overall workflow, where the lattice configuration x is
processed through an input embedding and encoder to feed both the backflow network and the determinant
expansion. (b) The Encoder architecture, featuring Nl layers of layer normalization, feed-forward blocks, and a
static kernel projection α with residual connections to produce the encoded features xencoded. (c) The Backflow
Network, which utilizes an electron feature projector and a spatial feature projector to generate mixed backflow
coefficients F(x). (d) The Multi-Determinant Expansion block, where encoded features are spatially averaged and
passed through a linear layer with a Softmax activation to produce configuration-dependent weights cij(x). These
weights are combined with the backflow-transformed features to evaluate the final weighted multi-determinant
wavefunction Ψ(x).
3.
Neural network backflow transformation
Neural network backflow transformation generalizes
the traditional Feynman-Cohen backflow [38] by using
deep learning architectures to map bare electronic coor-
dinates to a high-dimensional space [24]. The backflow-
transformed wavefunction has the form
ΨBF (x) = det[M + F(x)],
(3)
where M is the single-particle orbital matrix, and F(x)
is the neural network backflow coefficient matrix calcu-
lated from the given electronic configuration x.
Both
M and F(x) has the same shape R2Nsite×Nelectron, where
Nelectron is the number of electrons in the configuration.
We stack the two spin sectors into one matrix, hence the
shape 2Nsite along the row dimension. When calculating
the determinant, we select the electrons’ corresponding
occupied rows from M + F(x) to obtain the matrix with
proper shape RNelectron×Nelectron.
Instead of using a single linear layer to merely trans-
form the output backflow matrix to the proper shape,
we emphasize the expressive power of the backflow
network by constructing a deep separable bilinear ar-
chitecture.
The latent vector xencoded is first passed
through an electron feature projector followed by a spa-
tial feature projector.
Each projector is a three-layer
feed-forward network with Gaussian Error Linear Unit
(GELU) [39] activation functions in between. These two
modules decouple and transform the particle-specific and


4
coordinate-specific information into intermediate rep-
resentations, denoted as F ′(x) ∈RNsite×Nelectron and
F ′′(x) ∈R2Nsite×Nelectron. Both the intermediate feature
maps and the original encoded input are fed into a cen-
tral backflow coefficient mixing module. This final stage
acts as a fusion layer, combining the transformed spatial
and electron features with a residual path from the ini-
tial encoding. This ensures that the final output F(x)
preserves global context while being conditioned on the
specific local features extracted by the projectors. The
final backflow matrix is expressed as
F(x) = F ′′(x)⊙(J + W1xencodedY1 + W2F ′(x)Y2) , (4)
where ⊙represents element-wise multiplications; J is the
matrix whose entries are all ones; Wi and Yi are learnable
parameter matrices that transform xencoded and F ′(x) to
the same shape as F ′′(x).
D.
Multi-determinant wavefunction with low-rank
shifts
Our multi-determinant wavefunction with low-rank
shifts takes the form:
Ψ(x) =
X
i,j
cij(x) det[M + ∆Mi + (F0 + ∆Fj) ⊙F(x)],
(5)
where cij(x) are configuration-dependent weights; M and
F0 denote full-rank base matrices; ∆Mi and ∆Fj repre-
sent low-rank shifts that introduce the multi-determinant
character; and F(x) is the output of the neural network
backflow transformation.
Instead of using fixed mean-field orbitals, both M and
F0 are treated as learnable parameter matrices to pro-
vide greater variational flexibility. Each of the ∆matri-
ces is constructed as the product of two low-rank learn-
able matrices U ∈R2Nsite×r and V ∈Rr×Nelectron; that
is, ∆Mi = U M
i V M
i
and ∆Fj = U F
j V F
j . Here the rank
r is chosen to be small (r ≪Nelectron) to maintain pa-
rameter efficiency. We use the same value of r for both
∆Mi and ∆Fj matrices. In practice, we also include the
zero matrices ∆M0 = ∆F0 = 0, thereby retaining the
original backflow-transformed determinant in the multi-
determinant expansion.
The configuration-dependent weights are generated via
a simple one-layer network. Specifically, average pooling
is performed along the spatial dimension of the encoded
variable xencoded before the features are passed through
a linear layer.
Finally, a softmax activation function
is applied to produce the normalized coefficients cij(x).
This normalization effectively treats the expansion as a
weighted superposition of determinant components of the
same state.
E.
Efficient determinant evaluation via the matrix
determinant lemma
Our multi-determinant wavefunction requires us to cal-
culate the determinant
det [M + ∆Mi + (F0 + ∆Fj) ⊙F(x)]
for all ∆Mi and ∆Fj. The main computational bottle-
neck is the matrix determinant calculation, whose num-
ber scales as the product of the number of low-rank ma-
trices N∆M × N∆F .
Using the matrix determinant lemma [40], we can sig-
nificantly accelerate these calculations. The matrix de-
terminant lemma states that, for an invertible matrix A
of shape n × n and matrices U and V of shape n × r, the
following relation holds:
det
 A + UV ⊤
= det(A) det
 Ir + V ⊤A−1U

(6)
By construction, our matrix ∆Mi is the product of two
low-rank matrices ∆Mi = U M
i V M
i
. Defining Aj = M +
(F0 + ∆Fj) ⊙F(x), with Aj restricted to occupied rows,
we can apply the matrix determinant lemma with A =
Aj, U = U M
i , and V ⊤= V M
i
:
det [M + ∆Mi + (F0 + ∆Fj) ⊙F(x)]
= det

Aj + U M
i V M
i

(7)
= det [Aj] det

Ir + V M
i
A−1
j U M
i

.
(8)
Rather than calculating the full N∆M × N∆F determi-
nants, we now only need to compute the N∆F determi-
nants of the matrices Aj.
In addition to det[Aj], the new formulation requires
to calculate the inverse of each Aj. In practice, modern
numerical libraries such as NumPy and JAX treat the
matrix determinant and the matrix inverse as indepen-
dent operations. However, both calculations fundamen-
tally rely on an initial matrix factorization, such as the
LU decomposition. After this factorization is obtained,
the determinant and the required solves are cheaper than
forming a full inverse: the determinant det[Aj] is simply
the product of the diagonal elements of U (adjusted by
the pivot sign), and A−1
j U M
i
is found by forward and
backward substitution at cost O(N 2
electronr). Since the
O(N 3
electron) factorization step constitutes the primary
computational bottleneck, while the subsequent products
and substitutions are significantly less demanding, call-
ing these functions separately results in redundant and
costly decompositions. By explicitly performing a single
factorization, we can reuse the factors for the determi-
nant and all the required solves.
The
remaining
computation
is
the
matrix
mul-
tiplication
and
the
determinant
calculation
of
det

Ir + V M
i
A−1
j U M
i

.
The former has a complex-
ity of O(N 2
electron), and the latter scales as O(r3). Given
that r ≪Nelectron, these computations are significantly
cheaper
than
the
original
O(N 3
electron)
determinant


5
Algorithm 1: Efficient Multi-Determinant
Evaluation via Low-Rank Updates
Inputs: M, F0, U M
i , V M
i
, U F
j , V F
j , F(x) ;
for j ←1 to N∆F do
∆Fj ←U F
j V F
j
;
Aj ←M + (F0 + ∆Fj) ⊙F(x) ;
[Lj, Uj, Pj] ←LU Decomposition(Aj) ;
det(Aj) ←det from LU(Lj, Uj, Pj) ;
for i ←1 to N∆M do
Xij ←LU Solve(Lj, Uj, Pj, U M
i ) ;
Bij ←Ir + V M
i
Xij ;
ψij = det(Aj) det(Bij) ;
end
end
return Vector ψij
calculation.
Therefore,
we can reduce the overall
computational
cost
from
O(N∆MN∆F N 3
electron)
to
O(N∆F N 3
electron) + O(N∆MN∆F N 2
electronr).
Algorithm
1 describes the efficient multi-determinant calculation
that utilizes the low-rank updates.
We tested the speed improvement of the low-rank up-
dates at 1/8 doping with U/t = 8. Fig. 2 compares the
training time per iteration between direct determinant
evaluation and the low-rank update method. We ran the
experiments on a single NVIDIA H200 GPU. Panel (a)
shows that as the lattice size increases, the training time
for the direct determinant method rises from roughly 2
seconds to over 100 seconds. Over the same range, the
time for the low-rank updates increases from approxi-
mately 1.5 seconds to 11 seconds. At the largest system
size, the direct method is approximately 10 times slower
than the low-rank approach. In panel (b), increasing the
nonzero shift counts from (2, 2) to (16, 16) results in the
direct determinant time rising from approximately 6 sec-
onds to 105 seconds, while the low-rank method reaches
only approximately 11 seconds for shift counts (16, 16).
III.
ENERGY BENCHMARKS AND
CONVERGENCE
We test our neural network wavefunction ansatz on the
2D Hubbard model for both the half-filling and 1/8 dop-
ing cases, with periodic boundary conditions applied on
both spatial directions. For both cases, we test on the
strong correlation regime where U/t = 8. After train-
ing convergence, the variational energy and its associ-
ated error bar are calculated by generating 10 indepen-
dent Monte Carlo runs, each consisting of 16,384 sam-
ples. These runs measure sampling uncertainty at fixed
parameters, not variation between training runs.
FIG. 2: Scaling of computational cost for direct
determinant evaluation versus the low-rank lemma
application with r = 2. (a) Training time per iteration
as a function of the lattice sizes for a fixed nonzero shift
counts (16, 16). (b) Training time per iteration relative
to the nonzero shift counts (N∆M, N∆F ) for a fixed
4 × 16 lattice. Both plots utilize a logarithmic scale for
the vertical axis.
A.
Ground state energy
To evaluate the accuracy of the proposed architecture,
we first consider the 2D Hubbard model at half-filling.
Fig. 3 illustrates the variational energy per site across dif-
ferent square lattices. We adopt the energy results from
AFQMC [42] as the numerical benchmarks for compari-
son. On the 6 × 6 lattice, the Deep BF model achieves
a variational energy of −0.5268 per site, lying below the
BW1 and BW2 point estimates.
For the intermediate
8 × 8 geometry, Deep BF yields an energy of −0.5245
per site, again lying below the BW1 and BW2 point esti-
mates. On the largest 10×10 lattice, the Deep BF result
reaches −0.5231 per site, lying below BW1 and very close
to BW2.
To assess the performance of our network architecture
across different correlation regimes, we analyze the rela-
tive error of the variational energy as a function of the
on-site interaction strength U at half-filling on the 8 × 8
lattice. As shown in Fig. 4, the relative error is computed
directly against the AFQMC ground-state energy bench-
mark. In the weakly correlated regime at U/t = 2, the
Deep BF method achieves its highest precision, yielding


6
TABLE I: Comparison of different network architectures. The last column reports total energies.
Model
Backflow
Coefficients
Embedding Dim. (d)
# Params
Energy (E)
Net 1
Simple
Independent
32
44,861
−24.394
Net 2
Simple
Dependent
32
54,109
−24.419
Net 3
Deep
Dependent
32
61,317
−24.464
Net 4
Deep
Dependent
40
81,693
−24.474
FIG. 3: Variational energy per site for the 2D Hubbard
model at half-filling with respect to different lattice
sizes. The plot compares the performance of our deep
backflow (Deep BF) to various neural network backflow
architectures, including spin-block-separated (BW1)
and spin-mixing (BW2) tensor backflow, both with one
Lanczos step [41], and the auxiliary-field quantum
Monte Carlo (AFQMC) benchmarks [42] for different
L × L lattice sizes. The Deep BF error bars are smaller
than the markers.
a remarkably low relative error of approximately 0.0021.
As the interaction strength increases into the intermedi-
ate coupling regime, the relative error rises to approxi-
mately 0.0032 at U/t = 4 and peaks at roughly 0.0034
near U/t = 6.
Interestingly, as the system enters the
strongly correlated regime at U/t = 8, the trend reverses,
and the relative error decreases slightly to approximately
0.0032.
We further extend our analysis to the 1/8 doped
regime.
To assess the quality of the optimized varia-
tional wave function |Ψ⟩, we apply a one-step Lanczos
correction after training.
This procedure enlarges the
variational space to the Krylov subspace spanned by |Ψ⟩
and ˆH|Ψ⟩, yielding the corrected state
|ΨL⟩= (1 + α ˆH)|Ψ⟩,
(9)
where α is a variational parameter. The optimal α is ob-
FIG. 4: Relative error of the variational energy for the
8 × 8 Hubbard model at half-filling with respect to
different U/t values. The relative error is calculated
with respect to the AFQMC benchmarks [42].
tained by solving the associated 2 × 2 generalized eigen-
value problem for the projected Hamiltonian and over-
lap matrices and selecting the lowest eigenvalue solution.
All required matrix elements are estimated from Monte
Carlo samples drawn from the optimized reference state
|Ψ⟩. The energy variance after the Lanczos step requires
higher-order moments up to ⟨ˆH4⟩, which are computed
using the same stochastic estimators.
Fig. 5 presents the training results for the doped case,
where a network embedding dimension of 64 was used.
On the 4 × 8 lattice, the Deep BF result reaches an en-
ergy of −0.7659 per site, which is higher than only HFPS
and Deep BF Lanczos, the latter of which yields the low-
est energy point estimate on this geometry at −0.7671
per site. For the 4 × 12 system, the Deep BF energy is
−0.7640 per site, placing it below FF, BW1 and BW2,
but above HFPS and Deep BF Lanczos. Deep BF Lanc-
zos achieves an energy of −0.7662 per site, sitting slightly
below HFPS. On the largest 4 × 16 lattice, the Deep
BF model achieves an energy of −0.7598 per site, out-
performing FF and HFDS. Deep BF Lanczos finishes
at −0.7622 per site, which lies slightly below BW2 but
above HFPS.


7
FIG. 5: Variational energy per site for the 2D Hubbard
model at 1/8 doping. The plot compares our proposed
deep backflow network with feed-forward backflow (FF)
[24], hidden fermion determinant state (HFDS) [25],
tensor backflow (BW1 and BW2) [41], and hidden
fermion Pfaffian state (HFPS) [27] for different 4 × L
lattice sizes. The gray triangles represent our deep
backflow result, and the black triangles represent the
deep backflow result with a Lanczos step. The deep
backflow error bars are smaller than the markers.
To evaluate the impact of architectural complexity on
variational accuracy, we designed four neural network
models with varying degrees of flexibility in their back-
flow transformations and determinant coefficients (Ta-
ble I).
We tested these models on a 4 × 8 lattice at
1/8 doping with U/t = 8. The models range from Net
1, a baseline architecture with simple backflow and in-
dependent coefficients, to Net 4, a high-capacity model
utilizing deep backflow transformations and a larger em-
bedding dimension. This hierarchy allows us to perform
a variance extrapolation to estimate the exact ground-
state energy. Furthermore, these configurations serve as
the basis for the architectural analysis and interpretabil-
ity studies conducted in the following sections.
As shown in Fig. 6, our models exhibit a consistent lin-
ear trend. The systematic reduction in variance, achieved
by transitioning from simple backflow (Net 1) to a deeper,
higher-dimensional transformer architecture (Net 4), di-
rectly corresponds to a lowering of the variational en-
ergy.
By performing a linear least-squares fit to these
data points and extrapolating to the zero-variance limit,
we arrive at an estimated ground-state energy of −0.7681
FIG. 6: Variance extrapolation of the ground-state
energy for the 4x8 lattice. The energy per site for the
four network architectures (Net 1–4) is plotted against
the local energy variance per site. The dashed gray line
represents a linear fit to the data. The y-intercept
indicates the extrapolated ground-state energy in the
limit of zero variance, yielding Eextrap = −0.7681.
per site.
B.
Hyperparameter sensitivity
To assess sensitivity of our variational results, we ex-
amine the dependence of the ground-state energy with
respect to the key hyperparameters of the neural back-
flow ansatz. As shown in Fig. 7, we evaluate the energy
per site for the 4 × 8 lattice at 1/8 hole doping with
U/t = 8. We define our reference setup for these exper-
iments as d = 32, (N∆M, N∆F ) = (16, 16), and r = 2.
Specifically, panel (a) illustrates the dependence on the
embedding dimension for d = 8, 16, 32, 64. The energy
per site exhibits a sharp decrease between d = 8 and d =
16, followed by smaller energy gains as d approaches 64.
In panel (b), we observe the impact of the determinant
expansion (N∆M, N∆F ) at values of (2, 2), (4, 4), (8, 8),
and (16, 16). The plot shows a consistent monotonic re-
duction in energy across the entire range, with the most
significant improvement occurring between the (2, 2) and
(4, 4) configurations. Finally, panel (c) shows the sensi-
tivity to the low-rank cutoff for r = 1, 2, 4, 8. The energy
per site displays a steady, nearly linear decrease as the
rank is increased.
IV.
PHYSICS OF THE DOPED STATE
We investigate the optimized variational-state proper-
ties of the 1/8-doped 4×16 Hubbard model at U/t = 8 us-
ing a multi-scale analysis. We begin with local real-space
observables of spin and charge, followed by an analysis of
collective behavior and pairing tendencies via structure
factors.


8
FIG. 7: Energy per site for the 4 × 8 lattice at 1/8
doping as a function of key model hyperparameters. (a)
Network embedding dimension. (b) Number of
additional low-rank matrices (N∆M, N∆F ). (c) Rank r
of the additional ∆matrices.
A.
Real-Space Stripe Pattern
We first examine real-space signatures of stripe order
through local observables on the 4 × 16 lattice. Specifi-
cally, we compute the spin–spin correlation
Cs(r) = 1
N
X
i
⟨ˆSz
i ˆSz
i+r⟩,
(10)
the local hole density
hi = 1 −⟨ˆni⟩,
(11)
and the local magnetic moment
mi = 1
2 (⟨ˆni↑⟩−⟨ˆni↓⟩) .
(12)
Fig. 8(a) displays Cs(r), revealing a robust but spa-
tially modulated antiferromagnetic (AFM) background.
Notably, we observe two distinct domain walls character-
ized by a sign flip in the AFM order. These magnetic
boundaries align precisely with regions of high hole con-
centration, as further elucidated in panel (b). The visual-
ization reveals that the high-density regions (hi ≈0.18)
at the lattice boundaries and the central column align
perfectly with the magnetic domain walls. In these re-
gions, the local magnetic moments are suppressed to a
minimum of 0.03.
Conversely, in the lower-density re-
gions (h ≈0.06), the magnetic moments recover to val-
ues as high as 0.25, maintaining a standard checkerboard
pattern. These observations indicate the synchronization
of a spin-density wave (SDW) and a charge-density wave
(CDW).
B.
Momentum-Space Correlations and Pairing
The collective behavior of the system is further char-
acterized by the spin structure factor
S(q) =
1
Nsite
X
j,k
eiq·(rj−rk)⟨ˆSz
j ˆSz
k⟩
(13)
and the charge structure factor
N(q) =
1
Nsite
X
j,k
eiq·(rj−rk)(⟨ˆnjˆnk⟩−⟨ˆnj⟩⟨ˆnk⟩). (14)
As presented in Fig. 9(a), the spin structure fac-
tor S(q) exhibits prominent symmetric peaks at qx =
±7π/8. This incommensurate shift from the AFM point
(π) is consistent with the magnetic periodicity observed
in real space. In panel (b), N(q) shows distinct CDW
peaks located at qx = ±π/4.
We examine long-range pairing tendencies via the pair–
pair correlation function defined as
P(r) =
1
Nsite
X
i
D
ˆ∆†
i ˆ∆i+r
E
(15)
where ˆ∆†
i is the creation operator for a singlet Cooper
pair with dx2−y2 symmetry anchored at site i:
ˆ∆†
i =
1
√
2
X
δ
f(δ)

ˆc†
i↑ˆc†
i+δ,↓−ˆc†
i↓ˆc†
i+δ,↑

,
(16)
where δ ∈{±ˆx, ±ˆy} denotes the nearest-neighbor vec-
tors, and the form factor f(δ) is defined as +1 for bonds
along the x-direction and −1 for bonds along the y-
direction.
Panel (c) plots P(r) on a semi-logarithmic


9
FIG. 8: Real-space behaviors of the doped Hubbard model. (a) Real-space spin-spin correlation function Cs(r) with
the origin of the displayed displacement at the center. (b) Snapshot of local observables; the radius of green circles
represents the local hole density hi and the arrows represent the local magnetic moment mi. The lower values are
column-averaged hole densities, while the upper values describe moment magnitudes.
scale for distances r ∈[0, 8]. The pair correlations be-
yond the first shell are zero to within statistical uncer-
tainty. The correlation magnitude is highest at r = 0 and
undergoes a sharp decrease of approximately two orders
of magnitude by r = 2. For r > 2, P(r) exhibits oscil-
latory behavior with local maxima at r = 3 and r = 8,
fluctuating within the range of 10−3 to 10−4.
V.
ARCHITECTURAL ANALYSIS AND
INTERPRETABILITY
A.
Static kernel heatmaps
To gain insight into how the neural network captures
the underlying lattice structure, we examine the learned
weights of the static kernels α across different layers of
the encoder.
Unlike the dynamic components of the
network that respond to specific electron configurations,
these static kernels represent an input-independent map-
ping that enforces global spatial correlations. In a phys-
ical context, these kernels act as real-space filters that
mix features across lattice patches. By visualizing these
weights as heatmaps, we can directly observe the geo-
metric prior the model develops during the variational
optimization process.
Fig. 10 plots the static kernel heatmap for different
numbers of layers and independent kernels trained on the
4 × 8 lattice at 1/8 doping with PBCs applied on both
dimensions. The first encoder layer serves as a geometric
preprocessor, mapping the input sequence onto a 2D lat-
tice topology. Despite the linear indexing of patches, the
network identifies wrap-around connectivity by placing
significant weight on the off-diagonal corners, providing
evidence for learned periodic boundary conditions. These
learned interactions remain highly localized, prioritizing
the nearest-neighbor connections necessary to optimize
the system’s kinetic energy.
In the second layer, the kernels show more diagonal
structure, marked by the emergence of strong diagonal
elements that may reflect self-interactions within each
patch. This diagonal dominance suggests that the en-


10
FIG. 9: Computed observables for the 4 × 16 Hubbard
model at 1/8 doping. (a) S(q) showing incommensurate
SDW peaks at qx = ±7π/8. (b) N(q) displaying CDW
peaks at qx = ±π/4. (c) Pair-pair correlation P(r)
along the long axis on a semi-log scale. Error bars
denote the statistical uncertainty from Monte Carlo
sampling; their lower portions are truncated due to the
logarithmic scale.
coder may be placing greater emphasis on local renor-
malization, potentially reflecting the need to account for
the high energy costs associated with electron-electron in-
teractions. By the final layer, the kernels transition into
a more complex, stochastic distribution, with the strict
symmetries observed in earlier stages no longer apparent.
The absence of a simple real-space pattern may be consis-
tent with the representation of higher-order many-body
correlations.
FIG. 10: Learned static kernels α across 3 encoder
layers, each with 8 independent kernels. The heatmaps
show how the model learns to map spatial relationships
on the lattice, with red and blue representing positive
and negative patch-mixing weights.
B.
Determinant-basis orthogonality
The accuracy of a neural-network backflow wavefunc-
tion depends not only on the expressive power of the
network layers but also on the quality and flexibility of
the multi-determinant expansion it generates.
To elu-
cidate the physical structure learned by the various ar-
chitectures, we perform a systematic analysis of the de-
terminant basis across four distinct network setups, as
summarized in Table I.
These analyses are conducted
on a 4 × 8 lattice at 1/8 doping with PBCs applied in
both dimensions.
To construct the multi-determinant
wavefunction in Eq. (4), we utilize an expansion set of
17 ∆Mi and 17 ∆Fj matrices, each consisting of 16 dis-
tinct low-rank factorized matrix shifts and a special zero
matrix. For each network model, we generate a design
matrix X ∈RNsample×Ndet, consisting of Nsample = 4, 096
sampled test configurations as rows and Ndet = 289 de-
terminants as columns.
We begin with Net 1 as a baseline, featuring a sim-
ple backflow network consisting of only two linear layers
and configuration-independent coefficients for the linear
combination of the determinants. In Net 2, we introduce
configuration-dependent coefficients to increase the flexi-
bility of the multi-determinant expansion. Net 3 marks a
significant transition to a deep backflow architecture—as
illustrated in Fig. 1—which enables the capture of more
complex, non-local electronic correlations. Finally, Net 4
extends the deep backflow by increasing the embedding
dimension from d = 32 to d = 40, thereby increasing
the overall expressive power of the network. As shown
in the last two columns of Table I, each architectural
refinement leads to an increase in the total number of
parameters while simultaneously providing a systematic
lowering of the variational energy, with Net 4 yielding
the most accurate ground-state approximation.


11
FIG. 11: Gram matrices of the network models. The
heatmaps display the correlation (cosine similarity)
between the 289 determinants for architectures (a) Net
1, (b) Net 2, (c) Net 3, and (d) Net 4.
C.
Gram matrices and singular value spectrum
To characterize the pairwise similarity and redundancy
of the learned determinant basis, we compute the Gram
matrix G ∈RNdet×Ndet for each of the four network archi-
tectures. Across the sampled configurations in our design
matrix, we normalize the column vectors (determinants)
to unit length, such that the elements of the Gram ma-
trix, Gij = ⟨deti | detj⟩, represent the cosine similarity
between the i-th and j-th determinant basis states.
Fig 11 displays the Gram matrices for Net 1 through
4. A notable feature present in all four Gram matrices
is the recurring cross-hatch pattern. This structure is a
direct consequence of the multi-determinant construction
in Eq. (4), where the basis is formed by the outer prod-
uct of 17 ∆Mi and 17 ∆Fj shifts. The determinant basis
is therefore naturally grouped into blocks of 17 that ex-
hibit inherent structural similarities within the sampled
representation.
As the network becomes deeper and more expressive,
from Net 1 to Net 4, we observe an overall improvement
in the energy results, together with a decrease in the
density of the off-diagonal elements in the Gram matrix.
This indicates that the determinant basis states exhibit
less pairwise similarity in the later architectures. While
this does not by itself establish linear independence or
orthogonality, it may suggest that the more expressive
networks learn to organize the multi-determinant basis
such that the sampled determinants explore more dis-
tinct directions in the basis space. This may allow the
network to make more effective use of the available multi-
determinant degrees of freedom.
FIG. 12: Singular value spectrum of the network models
in log scale. The plots show the singular values of the
determinant design matrix X for architectures (a) Net
1, (b) Net 2, (c) Net 3, and (d) Net 4. The red dashed
line denotes a 1% threshold relative to the largest
singular value, used to define the effective rank of the
basis.
To further characterize the redundancy observed in the
Gram matrices, we compute the singular value spectrum
of the determinant basis for each network. We define the
effective rank as the number of singular values exceeding
1% of the maximum singular value, providing an effective
measure of the dimensionality of the 289-determinant ex-
pansion.
As shown in Fig. 12, Net 1 exhibits the strongest re-
dundancy, with an effective rank of only 179. The intro-
duction of configuration-dependent coefficients in Net 2
increases the effective rank to the full basis size of 289,
although the resulting energy remains higher than that of
the deeper architectures. The transition to deep backflow
in Net 3 is accompanied by a slight reduction in effective
rank to 280, which may suggest some consolidation of
the represented features. By increasing the embedding
dimension in Net 4, the effective rank increases again to
285, while the network achieves the lowest variational en-
ergy. Across all four networks, the singular value spectra
also exhibit a similar three-stage decay: an initial rapid
drop, followed by a relatively stable intermediate region,
and finally a more gradual decay toward the basis limit.
This structure suggests that the determinant basis con-
tains a small number of dominant modes together with
a broader set of less dominant modes that contribute to
the represented many-body state.


12
FIG. 13: PCA for the determinant basis. Projections of
4, 096 configurations onto the first two principal
components (PC1, PC2) for architectures (a) Net 1, (b)
Net 2, (c) Net 3, and (d) Net 4. Points are colored by
the sign of the total wavefunction Ψ. The value N99%
indicates the number of principal components required
to capture 99% of the total variance.
D.
Principal component analysis of the
determinant basis
To further examine how the determinant basis rep-
resents the sampled configurations, we employ princi-
pal component analysis (PCA) to visualize the high-
dimensional configuration space. We project the 4, 096
sampled test configurations from the original 289-
dimensional determinant space onto the first two princi-
pal components (PC1 and PC2), which correspond to the
directions of largest variance in the data. This projection
provides a low-dimensional view of the variation among
the sampled configurations and allows us to compare how
different network architectures organize the configuration
space.
Fig. 13 presents the PCA results for the four network
models. The projections illustrate a systematic refine-
ment of the wavefunction’s sign structure as the network
architecture increases in complexity. In the baseline Net
1 (a), despite PC1 capturing 90.6% of the variance, sig-
nificant sign-mixing is observed near the origin, possibly
indicating a poorly resolved nodal boundary. This model
also exhibits the smallest N99% value of only 16.
Net
2 (b) demonstrates a shift toward a higher-dimensional
basis representation, with N99% increasing to 148, yet
the separation in the projection between the Ψ > 0 and
Ψ < 0 domains remains diffuse.
A qualitative transition occurs in the deep backflow ar-
chitectures, Net 3 (c) and Net 4 (d), where the configura-
tion clusters become clearly isolated along the PC1 axis.
Notably, while these models achieve lower variational en-
ergies, their N99% values drop significantly to around 60.
This may indicate that the deep backflow mechanism rep-
resents the relevant sign variations using a smaller num-
ber of dominant principal components. With the larger
embedding dimension, Net 4 (d) shows a more clearly de-
fined boundary between the two clusters, with no visible
sign-mixing. This model also exhibits a slight increase
in the PC1 variance (72.1%) and N99% (63) compared
to Net 3.
Taken together, these results indicate that
the deeper backflow architectures produce a more clearly
separated representation of the wavefunction signs in the
sampled configuration space. This separation, however,
characterizes the learned representation rather than pro-
viding an independent test of whether the exact ground-
state signs are correctly reproduced.
VI.
DISCUSSION
In this work, we have systematically evaluated the
performance of a deep neural network backflow trans-
formation with low-rank multi-determinant updates for
the variational representation of the 2D Hubbard model
at U/t = 8. We examined both the half-filled and 1/8-
doped cases under periodic boundary conditions. By in-
troducing a diagnostic framework based on Gram matrix
analysis, singular-value spectra, and PCA of the determi-
nant basis, we move beyond treating the neural network
as a black box for energy minimization. Instead, these
diagnostics provide an interpretable view of how differ-
ent network architectures organize and utilize the multi-
determinant basis, offering insight into the representation
and efficiency of neural quantum states.
This diagnostic framework provides a two-stage char-
acterization of the neural network’s internal represen-
tation. The Gram matrix and singular-value spectrum
characterize the pairwise similarity and effective dimen-
sionality of the determinant basis, while PCA and the
N99% metric provide a complementary view of how effi-
ciently the sampled configurations are represented in a
lower-dimensional space.
Our results reveal two direc-
tions for improving the basis representation of the neural
wavefunction. First, the introduction of configuration-
dependent weights enhances the diversity and effective
dimensionality of the determinant expansion. By mak-
ing the determinant coefficients cij(x) functions of the
input configurations, the network gains additional varia-
tional flexibility in combining the multi-determinant ba-
sis states. This is reflected in Nets 2, 3, and 4, which all
achieve a threshold-dependent effective rank of approxi-
mately 280–289.
Second, the deep backflow network significantly im-
proves the representation of the wavefunction. While Net
2 increases basis diversity, its large N99% value, together


13
with the diffuse sign separation in the PCA projection,
suggests that the resulting basis remains relatively dis-
tributed across many principal components and does not
exhibit a clearly resolved sign boundary. In contrast, de-
spite having a slightly lower effective rank and N99% than
Net 2, Net 3 and Net 4 achieve much lower variational
energies and show a more distinct separation between the
Ψ > 0 and Ψ < 0 configurations. This suggests that the
deep backflow architectures can capture the relevant sign
variations with a smaller number of dominant principal
components while achieving lower variational energies.
These results suggest that increasing the diversity of the
determinant basis and improving the quality of its rep-
resentation are distinct aspects of the neural wavefunc-
tion: configuration-dependent weights allow more deter-
minants to contribute distinctively, while deep backflow
enables these determinants to be combined in a way that
more effectively captures the complex sign structure of
the 2D Hubbard model.
Potential
improvements
to
the
multi-determinant
ansatz could focus on increasing the expressivity and re-
ducing redundancy of the basis. While low-rank matrix
shifts reduce the number of parameters and accelerate
determinant calculations (see Appendix II E), employ-
ing full-rank matrices could provide greater flexibility in
the determinant transformations, potentially leading to
a more diverse basis at a higher computational cost. An-
other possible direction is to introduce an explicit regu-
larization term that encourages reduced pairwise overlap
between determinant basis states, applied as an auxiliary
loss alongside energy minimization. Such a regularization
could provide a direct way to control basis redundancy
during training rather than relying solely on the energy
objective.
VII.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Simulations for this work were performed using code
built upon NetKet [43, 44]. The neural network mod-
els and optimization pipelines were implemented with
JAX [45], Flax [46], and Optax [47]. The implementation
and training example are available in the accompanying
GitHub repository [48]. We gratefully acknowledge the
use of computational resources provided by the Yale Cen-
ter for Research Computing.
Appendix A: Training and network hyperparameters
1.
Training setup
The parameter update δθ of the SPRING method at
iteration t is given by
δθt = ¯O⊤
t ( ¯Ot ¯O⊤
t +λI)−1(¯ϵt −µ ¯Otδθt−1)+µδθt−1, (A1)
where
¯O
is
the
jacobian
matrix
with
shape
(Nsample, Nparameter)
¯Omk =
1
p
Nsample
(Omk −⟨Ok⟩)
(A2)
and
Omk = ∂ln Ψθ(xm)
∂θk
=
1
Ψθ(xm)
∂Ψθ(xm)
∂θk
;
(A3)
I is the identity matrix with shape (Nsample, Nsample);
¯ϵm = −δτ(EL(xm) −E)
p
Nsample
(A4)
where δτ is the imaginary time step; λ is the regular-
ization diagonal shift for the ill-conditioned ¯O, and µ is
a damping parameter used to stabilize the optimization
process.
TABLE II: Parameter setup for the training process.
Parameter
Symbol Value
VMC Sampling
Number of iteration
Nstep
60000
Number of samples
Nsample 4096
Number of Markov chains
Nchain
16
Sweep size
Nsweep
Nsite
Discarded samples per chain Ndiscard Nsite
SPRING Optimizer
Learning rate
η
0.01
Diagonal shift
λ
0.001
Momentum parameter
µ
0.8
Norm constraint
C
0.01 →0.01/9*
*The value is adjusted after 50000 iterations.
To
ensure
a
stable
optimization
procedure,
the
SPRING algorithm introduces a norm constraint to the
weight update. The constraint puts an additional lower
bound on the constant learning rate η:
δθ = δθ · min(η,
C
∥δw∥),
(A5)
where ∥δw∥is the Euclidean norm of the weight updates,
and C is a scalar constraint.
Unless otherwise specified, the parameter configura-
tions for the VMC and SPRING optimizer used in our
experiments are listed in Table II.
2.
Network setup
Table III summarizes the default architectural hy-
perparameters for the neural network models employed
throughout this study.


14
TABLE III: Hyperparameters for the network model.
Parameter
Symbol
Value
Embedding dimension
d
32
Number of encoder layers
Nlayer
3
Number of static kernels
Nkernel
8
Patch dimension
p
2
Nonzero determinant shifts (N∆M, N∆F ) (16, 16)
Low-rank cutoff
r
2
3.
Dimension of the matrices
Table IV provides a comprehensive summary of the
dimensions for all key matrices utilized throughout the
neural network architecture.
TABLE IV: Dimensionality of key matrices.
Matrix
Dimension
M
2Nsite × Nelectron
F
2Nsite × Nelectron
F ′
Nsite × Nelectron
F ′′
2Nsite × Nelectron
J
2Nsite × Nelectron
W1
2Nsite × Npatch
Y1
d × Nelectron
W2
2Nsite × Nsite
Y2
Nelectron × Nelectron
∆Mi
2Nsite × Nelectron
∆Fj
2Nsite × Nelectron
F0
2Nsite × Nelectron
U
2Nsite × r
V
r × Nelectron
Appendix B: Derivation of matrix determinant
lemma
Consider the square block matrix M ∈R(n+r)×(n+r)
defined as
M =
 A
−U
V ⊤
Ir

,
(B1)
where A ∈Rn×n is invertible, U, V ∈Rn×r, and Ir is the
r × r identity matrix.
We can perform a block Gaussian elimination to factor
M as
M =

In
0
V ⊤A−1 Ir
 A
−U
0 Ir + V ⊤A−1U

.
(B2)
Both
matrices
on
the
right-hand
side
are
block-
triangular, so their determinants are given by the prod-
uct of their diagonal blocks. Using multiplicativity of the
determinant, we obtain
det(M) = det(A) det
 Ir + V ⊤A−1U

.
(B3)
Alternatively, since Ir is invertible, we may factor M
by pivoting on the lower-right block. Performing block
elimination yields
M =

A + UV ⊤−U
0
Ir
  In
0
V ⊤Ir

.
(B4)
Taking determinants and using the block-triangular
structure gives
det(M) = det
 A + UV ⊤
.
(B5)
Equating the two expressions for det(M), we conclude
det
 A + UV ⊤
= det(A) det
 Ir + V ⊤A−1U

,
(B6)
which proves the matrix determinant lemma.
[1] U.
Schollw¨ock,
The
density-matrix
renormalization
group, Reviews of modern physics 77, 259 (2005).
[2] E. M. Stoudenmire and S. R. White, Studying two-
dimensional systems with the density matrix renormal-
ization group, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 3, 111
(2012).
[3] G. Vidal, Classical simulation of infinite-size quantum
lattice systems in one spatial dimension, Physical review
letters 98, 070201 (2007).
[4] J. I. Cirac, D. Perez-Garcia, N. Schuch, and F. Ver-
straete, Matrix product states and projected entangled
pair states: Concepts, symmetries, theorems, Reviews of
Modern Physics 93, 045003 (2021).
[5] C. V. Kraus, N. Schuch, F. Verstraete, and J. I. Cirac,
Fermionic projected entangled pair states, Physical Re-
view A—Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics 81,
052338 (2010).
[6] S. Zhang, J. Carlson, and J. E. Gubernatis, Constrained
path monte carlo method for fermion ground states,
Physical Review B 55, 7464 (1997).
[7] S. Zhang and H. Krakauer, Quantum monte carlo method
using phase-free random walks with slater determinants,


15
Physical review letters 90, 136401 (2003).
[8] S. Zhang, 15 auxiliary-field quantum monte carlo for cor-
related electron systems, Emergent Phenomena in Cor-
related Matter (2013).
[9] F. Becca and S. Sorella, Quantum Monte Carlo ap-
proaches for correlated systems (Cambridge University
Press, 2017).
[10] G. Sugiyama and S. Koonin, Auxiliary field monte-carlo
for quantum many-body ground states, Annals of Physics
168, 1 (1986).
[11] G. Carleo and M. Troyer, Solving the quantum many-
body problem with artificial neural networks, Science
355, 602 (2017).
[12] D. Wu,
R. Rossi,
F. Vicentini,
N. Astrakhantsev,
F. Becca, X. Cao, J. Carrasquilla, F. Ferrari, A. Georges,
M. Hibat-Allah, et al., Variational benchmarks for quan-
tum many-body problems, Science 386, 296 (2024).
[13] M. Schmitt, M. M. Rams, J. Dziarmaga, M. Heyl, and
W. H. Zurek, Quantum phase transition dynamics in the
two-dimensional transverse-field ising model, Science Ad-
vances 8, eabl6850 (2022).
[14] J. Nys, G. Pescia, A. Sinibaldi, and G. Carleo, Ab-initio
variational wave functions for the time-dependent many-
electron schr¨odinger equation, Nature communications
15, 9404 (2024).
[15] A. Chen and M. Heyl, Empowering deep neural quantum
states through efficient optimization, Nature Physics 20,
1476 (2024).
[16] R. Rende, L. L. Viteritti, L. Bardone, F. Becca, and
S. Goldt, A simple linear algebra identity to optimize
large-scale neural network quantum states, Communica-
tions Physics 7, 260 (2024).
[17] X. Ou, T. Huang, and V. Ozoli¸nˇs, Improving neural net-
work performance for solving quantum sign structure,
Physical Review B 112, 165122 (2025).
[18] L. L. Viteritti, R. Rende, A. Parola, S. Goldt, and
F. Becca, Transformer wave function for two dimensional
frustrated magnets: Emergence of a spin-liquid phase in
the shastry-sutherland model, Physical Review B 111,
134411 (2025).
[19] Y. Nomura, A. S. Darmawan, Y. Yamaji, and M. Imada,
Restricted
boltzmann
machine
learning
for
solving
strongly correlated quantum systems, Physical Review
B 96, 205152 (2017).
[20] K. Choo, A. Mezzacapo, and G. Carleo, Fermionic
neural-network states for ab-initio electronic structure,
Nature communications 11, 2368 (2020).
[21] D.
Pfau,
J.
S.
Spencer,
A.
G.
Matthews,
and
W. M. C. Foulkes, Ab initio solution of the many-electron
schr¨odinger equation with deep neural networks, Physical
review research 2, 033429 (2020).
[22] J. Hermann, Z. Sch¨atzle, and F. No´e, Deep-neural-
network solution of the electronic schr¨odinger equation,
Nature Chemistry 12, 891 (2020).
[23] A.-J. Liu and B. K. Clark, Neural network backflow for
ab initio quantum chemistry, Physical Review B 110,
115137 (2024).
[24] D. Luo and B. K. Clark, Backflow transformations via
neural networks for quantum many-body wave functions,
Physical review letters 122, 226401 (2019).
[25] J. Robledo Moreno, G. Carleo, A. Georges, and J. Stokes,
Fermionic wave functions from neural-network con-
strained hidden states, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 119, e2122059119 (2022).
[26] Z. Liu and B. K. Clark, Unifying view of fermionic neural
network quantum states: From neural network backflow
to hidden fermion determinant states, Physical Review B
110, 115124 (2024).
[27] A. Chen, Z.-Q. Wan, A. Sengupta, A. Georges, and
C.
Roth,
Neural
network-augmented
pfaffian
wave-
functions for scalable simulations of interacting fermions,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.10705 (2025).
[28] Y. Gu, W. Li, H. Lin, B. Zhan, R. Li, Y. Huang,
D. He, Y. Wu, T. Xiang, M. Qin, et al., Solving the hub-
bard model with neural quantum states, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.02644 (2025).
[29] L. Sharma, A. Shokry, R. Nutakki, O. Simard, M. Fer-
rero, and F. Vicentini, Comparing symmetrized determi-
nant neural quantum states for the hubbard model, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2510.11710 (2025).
[30] K. Loehr and B. K. Clark, Enhancing neural network
backflow, arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.26906 (2025).
[31] I. Romero, J. Nys, and G. Carleo, Spectroscopy of two-
dimensional interacting lattice electrons using symmetry-
aware neural backflow transformations, Communications
Physics 8, 46 (2025).
[32] R. Rodr´ıguez-Guzm´an, C. A. Jim´enez-Hoyos, R. Schut-
ski,
and
G.
E.
Scuseria,
Multireference
symmetry-
projected variational approaches for ground and excited
states of the one-dimensional hubbard model, Physical
Review B—Condensed Matter and Materials Physics 87,
235129 (2013).
[33] Y. Nomura, Helping restricted boltzmann machines with
quantum-state representation by restoring symmetry,
Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 33, 174003 (2021).
[34] M. Reh, M. Schmitt, and M. G¨arttner, Optimizing design
choices for neural quantum states, Physical Review B
107, 195115 (2023).
[35] G. Goldshlager, N. Abrahamsen, and L. Lin, A kaczmarz-
inspired approach to accelerate the optimization of neu-
ral network wavefunctions, Journal of Computational
Physics 516, 113351 (2024).
[36] S. Sorella, Wave function optimization in the variational
monte carlo method, Physical Review B—Condensed
Matter and Materials Physics 71, 241103 (2005).
[37] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn,
X. Zhai, T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer,
G. Heigold, S. Gelly, et al., An image is worth 16x16
words: Transformers for image recognition at scale, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.11929 (2020).
[38] R. P. Feynman and M. Cohen, Energy spectrum of the
excitations in liquid helium, Physical Review 102, 1189
(1956).
[39] D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel, Gaussian error linear units
(gelus), arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.08415 (2016).
[40] J. Ding and A. Zhou, Eigenvalues of rank-one updated
matrices with some applications, Applied Mathematics
Letters 20, 1223 (2007).
[41] Y.-T. Zhou, Z.-W. Zhou, and X. Liang, Solving fermi-
hubbard-type models by tensor representations of back-
flow corrections, Physical Review B 109, 245107 (2024).
[42] M. Qin, H. Shi, and S. Zhang, Benchmark study of
the two-dimensional hubbard model with auxiliary-field
quantum monte carlo method, Physical Review B 94,
085103 (2016).
[43] F. Vicentini, D. Hofmann, A. Szab´o, D. Wu, C. Roth,
C. Giuliani, G. Pescia, J. Nys, V. Vargas-Calder´on,
N. Astrakhantsev, and G. Carleo, Netket 3:
Machine


16
learning toolbox for many-body quantum systems, Sci-
Post Phys. Codebases , 7 (2022).
[44] G. Carleo, K. Choo, D. Hofmann, J. E. Smith, T. Wester-
hout, F. Alet, E. J. Davis, S. Efthymiou, I. Glasser, S.-H.
Lin, M. Mauri, G. Mazzola, C. B. Pereira, and F. Vicen-
tini, Netket: A machine learning toolkit for many-body
quantum systems, SoftwareX 10, 100311 (2019).
[45] J. Bradbury, R. Frostig, P. Hawkins, M. J. Johnson,
C. Leary, D. Maclaurin, G. Necula, A. Paszke, J. Van-
derPlas, S. Wanderman-Milne, and Q. Zhang, JAX: com-
posable transformations of Python+NumPy programs
(2018).
[46] J. Heek, A. Levskaya, A. Oliver, M. Ritter, B. Ronde-
pierre, A. Steiner, and M. van Zee, Flax: A neural net-
work library and ecosystem for JAX (2024).
[47] DeepMind, I. Babuschkin, K. Baumli, A. Bell, S. Bhu-
patiraju, J. Bruce, P. Buchlovsky, D. Budden, T. Cai,
A. Clark, I. Danihelka, A. Dedieu, C. Fantacci, J. God-
win, C. Jones, R. Hemsley, T. Hennigan, M. Hes-
sel, S. Hou, S. Kapturowski, T. Keck, I. Kemaev,
M. King, M. Kunesch, L. Martens, H. Merzic, V. Miku-
lik, T. Norman, G. Papamakarios, J. Quan, R. Ring,
F. Ruiz, A. Sanchez, L. Sartran, R. Schneider, E. Sezener,
S. Spencer, S. Srinivasan, M. Stanojevi´c, W. Stokowiec,
L. Wang, G. Zhou, and F. Viola, The DeepMind JAX
Ecosystem (2020).
[48] https://github.com/sweetpotat5/
Multi-determinant-nerual-network-backflow.
